The International Tin Association (ITA) and the Responsible Minerals Initiative (RMI) have jointly developed and published new assessment criteria for tin smelting companies, which seek to clarify common upstream and downstream due diligence requirements for the tin supply chain. The RMI is an initiative of the Responsible Business Alliance. The criteria were designed to align with the internationally recognised Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) due diligence guidance, assist with the new London Metal Exchange responsible sourcing requirements, and satisfy other upcoming requirements such as the European Union Minerals Due Diligence Regulation.

The criteria will be used by the RMI to replace its Tin Standard for the Responsible Minerals Assurance Process, following a transition period, and will also set the requirements for responsible sourcing to be evaluated by new assessment processes under the ITA’s Code of Conduct.

“We are excited to announce this important step forward in progressing due diligence and responsible sourcing for the tin industry,” ITA sustainability head Kay Nimmo said, adding that the new criteria would “not only improve risk management but will also help to streamline information requests through the supply chain”.

Responsible Business Alliance VP Leah Butler added that this further demonstrated the leadership of both ITA and the RMI, and their determination to tackle the very significant challenges involved in bringing the entire supply chain together to provide realistic but robust solutions for the responsible production and sourcing of tin. The criteria will enable audit firms and their individual auditors to conduct rigorous and consistent checks on whether any smelter has implemented OECD supply chain due diligence. After incorporating consultation feedback from a broad spectrum of stakeholders across the tin supply chain, a statement on Thursday highlighted that the criteria have been improved by focusing exclusively on the tin value chain and the structuring to reference each step of the OECD Due Diligence Guidance Supplement on Tin. Additionally, focus was placed on highlighting additional, separate regulatory or downstream expectations, as well as outlining practical expectations for red-flag review of suppliers. The criteria will also look to explain how smelters may use OECD-aligned joint industry initiatives for due diligence support, and will clarify terminology and separating procedural or guidance text for auditors. Both ITA and the RMI are continuing to work together to draft further guidance on criteria expectations in a workbook format for use by auditors and/or smelters as the new criteria are implemented. The development of associated training materials is also planned.