PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) has announced a A$400 000 investment by Australia’s oil and gas industry to support the Western Australian government’s liquefied natural gas (LNG) jobs taskforce. The funds would go towards an industry-led initiative to standardise training of LNG workers so their qualifications are recognised by all LNG operating companies. Called the LNG Operator Skills Framework, the initiative is supported by an industry training fund, administered by Appea, that collected levies paid by member and non-member companies sponsoring workers on the now-superseded 457 visas. The training programme will create the materials and coursework needed to ensure LNG process operators have the necessary skills to work safely and competently on an LNG plant. “This is a world-class initiative, funded by the industry, that will help solve the real problem of increasing costs for companies and causing frustration for workers having to retrain when they start work at a new LNG plant,” Appea CEO Andrew McConville said. Once finalised, the new training modules would ensure everyone who completes the course has skills and knowledge that would be recognised industry-wide. McConville said having the course available in Western Australia would not only benefit the local LNG industry but companies operating plants Australia-wide. “In addition, it’s expected the training will also attract students from around Australia and the world who are looking to further their careers by obtaining this industry-recognised qualification.” Work on the LNG Operator Skills Framework is well underway and will be completed during the first quarter of 2020. The Western Australian government in 2018 announced the LNG Jobs Taskforce, consisting of members from both industry and government, aimed at establishing Western Australia as an LNG hub. The taskforce will focus on harnessing the job opportunities the LNG industry could provide the Western Australian community, including new technology, education and maintenance services.