Stakeholders will have until December 31 to comment on the Global Tailings Review's (GTR's) draft standard for mine tailings management. The GTR was convened by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM) and the Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI) in June to establish an international standard on tailings facilities management. The independent GTR is led by Dr Bruno Oberle, supported by an interdisciplinary expert panel and informed by a multi-stakeholder advisory group. It has completed its initial research phase, including engaging with communities living and working near tailings storage facilities and evaluating current best practices from the mining industry. This research informed the development of the draft Standard. The consultation phase will allow the GTR to collect feedback from all interested stakeholders to enhance the development of a robust, fit-for-purpose international standard that will create a step change for the safer management of tailings. The public consultation will take place in two parts, with the first involving an online survey and the second in-country consultations across a range of mining jurisdictions in the northern and southern hemispheres. “The public consultation phase allows for critique, feedback and suggestions from others that both informs and enriches the draft standard, and we invite all stakeholders to share their diverse insights and points of view to help drive the change process forward. The draft standard is one part of a wider global drive to strengthen performance on tailings management and the requirements of the draft standard can complement these initiatives, for example, in areas such as corporate governance and public reporting,” comments GTR chairperson Dr Oberle. The GTR says it is committed to transparency and once the final standard is published, it will provide a consultation report that reflects feedback, key themes, topics and sentiments from different stakeholder groups, as well as how that feedback was processed and addressed in the final version of the standard. The final standard and accompanying recommendations report, which will outline broader proposals to support the uptake and implementation of the standard, is expected to be published in early 2020. “Responsible mining companies strive towards zero harm to people and the environment and creating a step change in the safer management of tailing storage facilities is fundamental to this commitment. The public consultation on the draft standard is a critical part of the GTR process and we encourage all interested parties to provide their feedback,” says ICMM CEO Tom Butler. “The Brumadinho disaster should never have happened and, as a result, we are all challenged to look at how the issue of tailings dams are addressed both in terms of the legacy of tailings facilities, the future operation of existing tailings facilities and future standards when a company decides if a tailings facility is needed. "There are a number of responses under way and the development of a new standard by this independent review will be a key tool for companies in driving best practice. We are mindful that zero harm to people and environment has to be the objective and the standard has an important role to play to achieving a mining sector whose tailings facilities are operating to such a standard," adds Adam Matthews from the Church of England Pensions Board on behalf of the PRI. UNEP Economy division director Ligia Noronha, meanwhile, also encourages local communities and experts to contribute to making the standard as robust as possible, stating that tailings dam failures are not accidents and are preventable.