PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Mining major BHP has announced that Mike Henry will be replacing Andrew Mackenzie as CEO from January 1. Mackenzie will step down as CEO, a member of the executive leadership team and an executive director of the company on 31 December 2019, and will retire from the group at the end of June 2020. Henry, who is currently the president of operations for the Minerals Australia division, has been a member of the executive leadership team since 2011, and has 30 years experience in the global mining and petroleum industry. The 53-year old joined BHP in 2003 and has held various positions within the group, including chief marketing officer, president of the coal division, president of health safety and environment, as well as marketing and technology. “Henry’s deep operational and commercial experience, developed in a global career spanning the Americas, Europe, Asia and Australia, is the perfect mix for our next CEO. I am confident his discipline and focus will deliver a culture of high performance and returns for BHP. Mike has been a strong advocate for the industry, driving higher standards of safety and a commitment to our local communities and global stakeholders,” said BHP chairperson Ken MacKenzie. Australian Resources Minister Matt Canavan on Thursday thanked Mackenzie, saying he provided dedicated leadership at BHP through his tenure. “He has provided calm leadership though some difficult years for the resources sector especially during the commodity downturn a few years ago. Thanks to his leadership, BHP has emerged as healthy as ever,” Canavan said. The Minister said that Henry would bring extensive Australian experience to the role, which would serve him well in leading the company. “Henry has an innate care for the wonderful people that make up the resources industry and he is passionate about improving opportunities for those in the industry. “[He] played a key role as a member of the government's Resources 2030 Taskforce that helped develop the government's National Resources Statement. That statement outlines the government’s commitment to increase investment, develop skills, protect the environment, expand value adding opportunities and ensure the resources sector provides benefits to indigenous and regional communities.” The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) also welcomed the appointment, with CEO Tania Constable saying his vast experience in resources, across many sectors, will serve him and the industry well as he steps into the new role next year. “The MCA will work with Henry and BHP to ensure Australian mining continues to meet the highest levels of environmental, social and governance standards while creating jobs and giving back to the community.”