Technology and engineering multinational Siemens and renewable energy developer juwi have entered into a strategic technology partnership to focus on supplying microgrids to the mining industry. The companies plan to roll out and continually develop the advanced microgrid control system that enables the seamless integration of power from renewable energy to a mine’s off-grid power supply. The Siemens Sicam-based microgrid control platform is a proven and tested technology, which is the basis for juwi’s hybrid IQ microgrid controller. juwi, on the other hand, brings industry-specific domain know-how and a record of planning and executing renewable energy projects at mine sites. The solution adapts to changing orebodies, processing and power requirements, while providing detailed reporting and analysis to operations teams and management. Together, the strategic partners are looking to create a standardised solution for the mining market, which will simplify the use of renewable energy for mines and help to provide a cost-effective and reliable power supply, especially for mine sites that operate off the grid. “Microgrids can bring high levels of reliability and improved energy quality to energy-intensive industries such as mining and are an attractive alternative when autonomous power supply is needed,” said Siemens digital grid CEO Robert Klaffus. He added that Siemens, through the technology cooperation with juwi on microgrids, would boost the commercial appeal of renewable energy to the mining industry. juwi group board member Stephen Hansen, meanwhile, commented that renewable energy would “not only future proof mining operations, but reduce cash operating costs” in the near term. The centerpiece to this was the juwi Hybrid IQ system, he elaborated, adding that it enabled the partnership to provide hybrid power that went far beyond what had been industry practice until now. The cooperation between juwi and Siemens had already resulted in the successful delivery of a solar power plant at Agnew Gold, in Australia. The partnership also provides hybrid power to Australia’s largest and oldest marine research station on the Great Barrier Reef. Heron Island now uses juwi Hybrid IQ to combine solar with a redox flow battery to replace diesel fuel. Both projects showcase the next generation of hybrid systems and enable mine sites to significantly lower their carbon footprint and their cash operating costs.