JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – South Africa is the best performing mining jurisdiction in the world, Anglo American CEO Mark Cutifani said last night. He chided South Africans for not giving themselves the credit they deserved regarding transformation already achieved and described South Africa as “a wonderful country”. “South Africa still remains one of the most exciting locations in the world and certainly from our company’s point of view, it’s still the most important location. “We’re making almost 50% of our earnings from our businesses in South Africa. “We’re proud of our roots, our heritage,” he said in an address to journalists at a year-end media function attended by Mining Weekly Online. Narrating an incident in which he was confronted by a shareholder about Anglo’s “South African problem”, he recalled how he stopped the conversation, and requested the shareholder to define what he meant by “the South African problem”, given that South Africa is Anglo’s best performing global jurisdiction with margins of 30% to 40% and returns of 20% to 30%. While South Africa’s navigation of transformation had been bumpy and was not yet where it needed to be, its progress outstripped everything he had seen in his 40 years of mining. “We’re proud to be part of the country and we're not going anywhere,” he added. At President Cyril Ramaphosa’s recent investment conference, Anglo committed to ongoing investment. “We also said to the President on the last day of the conference that we were already working on next year’s contribution and what we could do to improve our contribution on an ongoing basis. “While we still have questions on the Mining Charter, we’re overwhelmingly positive about the changes that have been made so far, and we’ve made the commitment to the Minister to continue to engage and hopefully be able to resolve the issues without relying on the courts. “But at the same time, we acknowledge the rights of certain individuals that probably are in a different position to where we are with our mining rights… but at the same time, we would hope to play a constructive part in resolving those differences. “If we can help in any way, with the work on Eskom or the work in any other institution, we would certainly be keen to understand how we could make a contribution. “We’ve got to be careful too as a company, as we all should be, that this doesn’t come across as being arrogant. “We’re not suggesting that we know better than anyone else in the community. What we’re saying is that as an organisation with more than 70 000 employees in the country, we have a broad skills base that from our perspective should be available to a national project in making a difference in society. “When we talk about the future that we’re trying to create, it’s more than simply digging a hole and producing a product and employing people. "We hope to be considered as partners in communities and that’s really a big change that we’ve tried to think through and improve on in the last 20 odd years or so,” Cutifani said.