KOLKATA (miningweekly.com) – State run mine Coal India Limited (CIL) has identified coking coal and high-grade thermal coal assets in Australia for strategic investments and will be appointing merchant bankers to conduct financial due diligence of these targeted acquisitions. CIL is looking at picking up equity stakes in coking coal and high-grade coking coal assets with enabling provisions of assured offtake of part of production from acquired assets for shipments back to India. “CIL intends to avail services of internationally reported merchant bankers, investment bankers to carry out financial due diligence and render transaction advisory services with respect to acquisition of stakes along with offtake rights in coal assets in Australia held by a company for purpose of arriving at an enterprise valuation of the company and framing non-binding offer initially followed by a final and binding offer,” a CIL statement said. “A tender is being floated for engagement of merchant banker, investment banker for assisting CIL in acquiring coal assets in Australia,” the statement added. The State miner has renewed efforts to acquire global assets anticipating that domestic production of thermal coal would not be able to keep pace of rising demand from operational and planned new thermal power plants. At the same time, India import dependency on coking was expected to rise exponentially against back from of government’s target of 300-million tons of domestic steel making capacity by 2030 and limited Indian resources of coking coal. “In light of this, CIL intends to set up coking coal and high grade low ash thermal coal mining business overseas with a view to acquire coal resources, produce coal and import the produce back to India by way of either opening new mines abroad of equity participating in working mines on production sharing participation interest basis,” the CIL statement said. According to industry data, Indian coal imports increased 9% during 2018/19 at 164.21-million tons compared with the previous financial year. Alongside, coking coal imports during 2018/19 was 47.73-million tons, almost the same volume shipped in during the previous year. The Power Ministry has estimated coal demand of domestic thermal power plants at 651-million tons during fiscal 2019/20 with CIL assuring thermal companies of supplying at least 530-million tons during the year. Besides the supply gap, the state miner’s bulk production was that of high ash content thermal coal and thermal power plant operators were having to resort to high import volumes of high gross calorific value thermal coal for blending with domestic coal for their thermal plant boilers.