JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Gold mining is expected to resume at the old Blyvooruitzicht gold mine in the last quarter of this year, Blyvoor Gold executive chairperson Peter Skeat has told Mining Weekly Online. “We’ve worked very hard and we’re at the point of moving ahead. We’ve got cash, we’ve got a balance sheet, we’ve got no debt, we’ve got a motivated mining team, we’ve got the community behind us, and we have absolutely no union problems. “We believe we can do a whole lot more of this because the industry has just not tackled the problems responsibly; there’s upside to this,” Skeat commented to Mining Weekly Online in an interview at the company’s office in Houghton. As the construction of the treatment plant is five months ahead of schedule, a plan to treat vamping tonnages from underground and high-grade tailings has been initiated. This will allow gold production to commence during September, albeit at a relatively low level. The underground production from stoping is scheduled to begin three-months ahead of schedule in December, with gold production building up to some 300 kg a month by April/May 2020. Skeat’s career path to date takes in a long, insightful, entrepreneurial period of contract mining outcrop gold reefs, starting from South Roodepoort Deep in 1981 and taking in Durban Deep, Rand Leases, Vogelstruisfontein, City Deep, Village Main, Primrose and Modder B until 1996; acquiring The Afrikander Lease Gold Mine from Anglo American in 1997; being involved in the acquisition of Ergo from Anglo American in 2005; relaunching mothballed Agnes gold mine as Galaxy Gold in 2009, and acquiring the old defunct and ravaged Blyvooruitzicht gold mine in 2017. Now, as Blyvoor Gold, he is at the ready to restart gold production, using a tested mining method that appears to have the potential to restart South Africa’s entire gold mining across the Witwatersrand – and he is firm about achieving the low cost level of $600/oz, at a time when the gold price is entering the $1 400/oz range. “A key focus of ours is that we don’t want to promise anything that we can’t deliver. When we say $600/oz, we’ve thoroughly tested that and we’re quite happy that we’re going to do it,” said Blyvoor CEO Alan Smith, the highly experienced former COO of AngloGold Ashanti, whose career path to date spans Anglo American, New Diamond Corporation, Lesotho Diamond Corporation, KIVU Resources, Incubex Minerals, SepFluor, and which now takes in BFluor Mauritius and  Blyvoor Gold. Blyvooruitzicht, which in the 1970s and 1980s was the Rolls Royce of gold mines, both locally and globally, still has a 100 years of resources ready to mine, of which 50 years are in the bag. Blyvoor’s problem was that it got stuck in an era of too many nonprofitable shafts being kept open, coupled with the bad gold price of the time. “There’s no point in starting up with a tired gold plant, even with a fresh workforce. There’s no point in having tired electrical infrastructure, because then your downtime starts eating your margin. We raised the billion rand we needed and we started a massive capital project to put in a brand new gold plant,” Blyvoor Gold deputy chairperson Richard Floyd outlined to Mining Weekly Online. Skeat has built more than 20 gold plants in his time. He brought in his crack team and visible now are brand new electrical substation and electrical reticulation, brand new digital winder electronics and controls, so that by the time the first ounce of gold is poured in the last quarter of this year, brand new infrastructure and underground development will be in place to support what is really a brand new mine. Drilling and blasting techniques have been taken to a new level, as has mining and hoisting. When it comes to mining, holes will no longer be drilled into the face conventionally. All of this has been checked and monitored by explosives company AEL and other underground tests have been proven and videoed. The last image most people in the industry have of the old Blyvooruitzicht was one of denuded destruction. “We inherited a wreck of a mine two years ago. We spent most of our own half a billion rand getting that back before we got funding. So, what you’re seeing now is the new Blyvoor,” said Skeat he showed a video of Blyvoor under reconstruction. Pictures taken two months ago and handed to Mining Weekly Online show: Employees have formed a new union, the nearby community has pledged its support, a mining right was obtained from government in a matter of months, and $600/oz was firmly set as the all-in sustainable cost. Once those three fundamentals were satisfied, Blyvoor Gold was taken forward. NEW MINING METHOD For 130 years, underground South African mining has been based mainly on conventional drill-and-blast techniques. Now Blyvoor Gold is on the cusp of changing in a manner that will cut costs and enhance safety. A key part of the new mining method is to make use of a major 120% charge to electronically blast waste burden into the stope as backfill, and three second later carry out a second blast that leaves a high-grade stockpile in the area cleared by the first blast. The grade is put at what Blyvoor Gold executives describe as a "very conservative" 25 g/t. They calculate mining cost at 4 g/t and overheads of 1 g/t, to yield a very healthy margin of 20 g/t. Backfilling brought about by the blast also creates conditions requiring far less ventilation, which saves costs and there is also a big safety element owing to the span never being more than 4 m  to 5 m. This lowers the risk of rockburst: “You’re providing support with your waste. But over and above that, you’re opening up the stoping width from the 1 m and 1.1 m to 1.5 m because you’ve now got room in which to put the waste. So, people can stand up in the stope and not have to crawl around. We will be lighting up the stope with massive LEDs, so it will look like Ellis Park during a rugby final, and fibre-optics in the stopes will provide for direct communication,” Smith tells Mining Weekly Online. Overall, the steps taken will significantly reduce the cutoff grade to less than 4 g/t. Huge 20 g/t blocks of ore are available to be mined. Why? Because that was the cutoff back then and nobody has gone back to mine them. Other big stockpiles are at 15 g/t, for the same reason. Others are at 10 g/t in areas not mined Although the carbon leader reef will be mined, still 75% intact and at a shallower level is the Middelvlei reef. Whereas the air was pumped into an open stope and diluted, the backfill restricts it into a three-metre gap, so the air velocity rises, the amount of air needed is reduced and the air is cooler and cleaner air. The upshot is reduced electricity costs and fibre-optics will open up telecommunication from underground to surface and from surface to underground. One of the most important aspects of mining is getting drilling depth and direction right, which was not prioritised in the do-it-as-we-did-it yesterday approach. “Many of the old shafts have big pillars around them and they’re not being used. So we can go back to these very big pillars around unused shafts. That’s in our 15-year plan to immediately tackle these plus some of the stockpiles. So, immediately our mining plan has got 15 years, but there are easily 50 years to mine in time and there are about 100 years if you add the whole lot up from what we can see,” said Skeat. “This is a game changer,” added Floyd, and it certainly looks that way to Mining Weekly Online.