JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – The Botswana Stock Exchange-listed Minergy on Thursday announced that its CFO Morne du Plessis had been appointed CEO-designate and would take over the reins of the coal mining and coal trading company on August 1. This follows last month’s announcement that current Minergy CEO Andre Bojé, 63, would be retiring. “It’s the right time to step back,” said Bojé. He will do so after steering the company through its listing and mine development phases and will subsequently retain oversight and strategic responsibility for group coal marketing for 12 months. Bojé will also remain part of the team tasked with ensuring the successful listing of Minergy on the London Stock Exchange's Alternative Investment Market. The company opted for a main board Botswana listing two years ago to leverage off its 100%-owned, 390-million-tonne Masama coal project in the Mmambula coalfield. In a release to Creamer Media’s Mining Weekly Online, Minergy said that the appointment of Du Plessis, a chartered accountant with an MBA from Heriot Watt University in Edinburgh, Scotland, had followed an extensive internal and external candidate selection process. Du Plessis, who led the board of Minergy for more than two years, formed part of the operational team that developed the Masama project. He has also held management positions for several coal mining and trading groups, including contract mining and beneficiation service provider Genet SA, junior coal miner Umcebo, and the Johannesburg Stock Exchange-listed Wescoal. Minergy nonexecutive chairperson Mokwena Morulane attributed the realisation of the Masama coal project and the company’s local listing to Bojé’s deep understanding of the coal industry and his tenacity in the face of a multitude regulatory and physical challenges. In turn, Du Plessis’ extensive public company director experience and in-depth knowledge of Minergy’s flagship Masama project as significant factors in the board’s decision to appoint him as CEO. Other recent Minergy appointments have included those of financial manager Julius Ayo, mining GM Siyani Makwakwago, and safety, health and environment manager Herbert Kebafetotse, which an enthused Du Plessis described as being indicative of Minergy’s culture of ensuring training across the organisation. “I feel that I’m part of something big which will create opportunities and transform the lives of many Batswana,” said Ayo, while Makwakwago lauded the company’s diverse approach to resolving any potential issues and Kebafetotse appreciated being part of the construction, commissioning and operation of “a potential giant in Botswana’s coal mining history”. Minergy Coal MD Martin Bartle is responsible for the overall profitability, mining, processing and safety. Minergy has local offices in the villages of Medie and Lentsweletau primarily to ensure that detailed skills audits are conducted and also provide a contact point for various communities to interact with the project. At the moment, of the 246 employees on the mine site, 236, or 96%, are Batswana. Training at the mine site is taking place, mainly through subcontractors, and primarily involving machine operation. “As we transition from the project phase to full production, a vast amount of training will continue to take place and, in this phase, we will really be building coal expertise within Botswana,” Du Plessis assured. Masama has a 100-year life-of-mine and Minergy aims to extract 2.4-million tonnes of coal a year at the shallow mine that has coal seams with thicknesses of up to 6 m.