JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – South Africa, which has excellent solar and wind energy potential, is well placed to produce and export clean renewable hydrogen, says Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) senior research engineer Thomas Roos. Hydrogen is emerging globally as an environment-friendly energy carrier and Japan is planning to import up to 800 000 t/y of hydrogen from 2030, Roos tells Mining Weekly Online. The hydrogen price level of ¥30/m3, set by Japan, translates into about $3/kg, which can be achieved in South Africa by 2030. Japan also wants the hydrogen it imports to be carbon free by 2040.  South Africa can meet this requirement ten years early. A study is currently underway to determine the costs to transport hydrogen by land and sea, including shipping to Japan. By the end of this study, it will be possible to determine the year by which hydrogen generated, using South African sunshine and wind, may be delivered to a Japanese port at the target price set by Japan. The timely building of infrastructure would be required, supported by an offtake agreement with Japan, with which South Africa already has cordial relations. When President Cyril Ramaphosa went to Japan in 2015 as Deputy President, he drove a hydrogen-using Toyota Mirai fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV). At the time, Ramaphosa and the then Science and Technology Minister and now International Relations Minister Naledi Pandor were attending the Japan South Africa hydrogen and fuel cell symposium, with Hydrogen South Africa directors and officials from the Department of Energy and the Department of Trade and Industry. The next year, while launching a fuel cell forklift and hydrogen refuelling station at the Impala Platinum refinery in Springs, Pandor noted the growing political will to develop commercial-scale hydrogen infrastructure in Japan and said South Africa would have to address the issue of hydrogen distribution from highly dispersed sources of production as one of the bigger challenges of developing a hydrogen economy. Japan had by that stage adopted a hydrogen and fuel cell strategy, which involves moving the country towards emission-free FCEV transport, stationary fuel cell residential electricity and hydrogen-using combined-cycle power stations. The around-the-clock electricity potential presented by South Africa’s sun and wind resources allow capital-intensive, hydrogen-producing electrolysers to be run at a high utilisation factor, which is attractive to investors because it lowers the cost of hydrogen production. To produce hydrogen, it is envisaged that renewable power will be used to desalinate seawater and then to electrolyse the desalinated water. While 50 kWh are required to electrolyse 1 kg of hydrogen, only 3 kWh are required to produce a cubic metre of desalinated water, which is equal to 1 000 kg.  Compared with electrolysis energy costs, desalination energy costs are seen as being negligible. In addition to being located at the coast to be able to access seawater, it would be most beneficial to produce the hydrogen close to a port, to avoid the costs of the overland transport of the hydrogen. An attractive potential site for this purpose is Eastern Cape’s under-used deep-water Port Ngqura, near Port Elizabeth, the Coega Special Economic Zone of which already has a renewable power designation as well as a strong integrated logistics corridor for the delivery of gas to the hinterland. “Argentina is in Japan’s sights as a feasible supply partner, so that means South Africa could be too,” says Roos. Although modelling shows that Argentina can produce hydrogen at lower cost than South Africa, the shipping distance to Japan is longer from the South American country. Preliminary assessments indicate that the combined generation and transport costs are lower for South Africa, which nudges it down into second place. Should South Africa succeed in securing Japan as a bulk renewable hydrogen offtake partner, there is potential for China, South Korea and other hydrogen-embracing Asian countries to eventually come into South Africa’s export sights as well. While the Northern Cape has excellent solar power potential and could be a great source of renewable energy, the north-western part of the Eastern Cape, which is closer Coega, also has good solar potential, while the Cookhouse area offers good wind potential. It would be best to provide renewable generation infrastructure dedicated to electrolysis, for which Eskom would be required to give “wheeling” permission. South Africa’s combined solar and wind power provide a hydrogen production capacity factor of almost 100% during daylight hours; during the night, wind will enable electrolysers to produce hydrogen at a capacity factor of about 30%, which is higher than the international norm of about 22%. If surplus electricity can be sold to third parties, the cost of hydrogen production will become even cheaper. Besides seawater, innovative South African company Hydrox Holdings is also considering using acid mine drainage water for hydrogen production at a price competitive with petrol. The company envisages making hydrogen readily accessible to the public by adopting the single-pump model pioneered at filling stations by Sasol in its early days. An advantage of Hydrox’s divergent electrode flow through electrolyser is that it can operate at temperatures greater than conventional systems, owing to the absence of temperature-limiting membranes. Isondo Precious Metals CEO Vinay Somera says that hydrogen has emerged as the main storage medium for green energy generated from solar, wind and other renewable sources. Isondo wants to locally manufacture membrane electrode assembly (MEA) in the upcoming OR Tambo International SEZ, at Johannesburg International Airport. MEAs are the core components of electrolysers and fuel cells. Somera believes that South Africa’s sunlight, wind, platinum and base metals can be combined within a value chain that offers one of the biggest opportunities to grow the South African economy. UPCOMING FUEL CELLS FEATURE Companies wanting to advertise in Mining Weekly's upcoming fuel cells feature should contact Creamer Media COO Sales and Marketing Reinette Classen at +27 11 622 3744.