PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Northern Territory government has approved amendments to the existing management plan for diversified major Glencore’s McArthur River base metals mine, allowing recommendations made by the Environment Protection Authority (EPA) to be implemented. The amendments, along with the recent environmental approval granted by the Commonwealth government, meant that Glencore could begin work on its overburden management project (OMP). The OMP would see openpit mining continue at McArthur River until 2037, during which time a redesign of the Northern Overburden Emplacement Facility (NOEF) will be undertaken to store waste rock and manage geochemistry. Between 2038 and 2047, Glencore will re-process tailings at McArthur River, with the re-processed tailings to be placed in the opencut void overlaying waste rock. The project will be decommissioned and rehabilitated between 2048 and 2072. Works that can take place under the approved amendments include the development of the NOEF and waste rock placement in two sections of the NOEF consistent with the OMP methodologies, and the start of trials for the NOEF cover system to inform optimum waste encapsulation strategy. The amendments also allow for NOEF flood proofing works, while allowing the tailings storage facility (TSF) Cell 2 lift and reuse of TSF Cell 1 for tailings deposition and construction of TSF seepage interception system; and targeted geological, hydrological and engineering site investigation works. “We have listened to our independent environmental watchdog, the EPA, and have created a pathway through today’s approval for the implementation of all 30 recommendations made in the EPA’s assessment report,” Minister for Primary Industry and Resources Paul Kirby said. “Ongoing development of the mining industry in the Northern Territory is important. Our government expects it to be done in a sustainable and responsible manner, maximising economic benefits while focusing on minimising environmental impact.” The McArthur River mine, which has operated for over 25 years, currently employs over 1 000 people. “The Territory government is supporting jobs and protecting the environment, delivering strict regulation for the McArthur River mine and its future operations,” Kirby said.