A testwork programme has demonstrated that feldspar and quartz from spodumene concentrate at the Mina do Barroso project, in Portugal, are suitable for use in a range of glass and ceramic applications, London-listed Savannah Resources reported on Tuesday. The company said that the testwork had validated the feldspar from the project for both ceramic bodies and glazes, as well as float and container glass, in addition to validating Mina do Barroso quartz for lead crystal and container glass. The testwork has confirmed that there is potential for the sale of a combined feldspar and quartz bulk tail from Mina do Barroso requiring no further processing. Production of this bulk material would potentially eliminate about $15-million from the estimated processing plant capital expenditure that would be required to produce separate quartz and feldspar co-products. The junior pointed out that marketing studies concluded that prices for Mina do Barroso co-products could be significantly higher than reported in the 2018 scoping study, with feldspar at $65/t to $100/t compared with the $39/t used in the study. Quartz is trading at $60/t to $100/t, compared with $33/t and a bulk tail at $40/t and $45/t. "Glass and ceramics are huge global industries, with Europe representing 25% of global production of ceramics.  Feldspar and quartz products have been produced in this region of Portugal for decades and are well regarded by glass and ceramic manufacturers in the domestic market and in Spain. The completed testwork has validated Mina do Barroso's feldspar and quartz for these applications,” said CEO David Archer. Savannah has entered into discussions with potential offtake and joint venture partners to advance the co-product opportunity, noting that Mina do Barroso is geographically well positioned to supply markets in Portugal, Spain and other European countries. The sale of products derived from the lithium concentrator tails would generate additional revenue and reduce the costs and the footprint associated with waste storage on site. Mina do Barroso is currently targeting an average production rate of 175 000 t/y of battery grade spodumene lithium concentrate in addition to targeting the production of feldspar and quartz co-products.