Opposition to exploratory mining in the Skagit river watershed, in south-west British Columbia (BC), is growing, with a group of 29 organisations having written to the BC Chief Inspector of Mines requesting that he denies copper/gold miner Imperial Metals a permit for its proposed work in the area. The letter, dated August 13, is undersigned by organisations representing conservation, recreation, wildlife organisations and local businesses, including Rivers Without Borders. The organisations argue that the transboundary watershed is a treasure on each side of the US-Canada border and that proposed mining activities will “exponentially increase” the potential threats to the Skagit river headwaters – an area supporting a diversity of fish and wildlife. Tourism also fuels significant economic activity in the rural communities. Imperial’s application to drill for gold and copper falls in a 5 800 ha "donut-hole" of unprotected wildland, which is sandwiched between the Manning and Skagit Provincial Parks. “Whether here in the Skagit region or elsewhere in BC, pristine and intact headwaters, shared by multiple jurisdictions, is no place for mining. Such endeavours come with new road construction, deep core drilling, impacts on ground water, and risks of tailings spills and breaches affecting the water quality for fish, wildlife and drinking water. Acid mine drainage resulting from mining ore can leach toxic heavy metals such as copper, zinc, cadmium and others, which can be extremely harmful to fish and other aquatic life.” The organisations say that copper has a severe impact on salmon. “Even a slight increase in trace amounts of copper above natural stream levels, for example, suppresses the ability of trout and salmon to smell, making it harder to avoid predators, find mates and return to spawning grounds.” The letter notes that the mining proposal in the Skagit headwaters is “but one of a growing list of concerns around the lack of oversight” of Canadian mining projects near transboundary rivers that originate in British Columbia and flow into four US states, including Alaska, Washington, Idaho and Montana. The latest opposition to the proposed exploratory mining follows on a letter in May from members of the Washington congressional democrats to US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo voicing their opposition to the proposed activity in the Skagit river headwaters.