SINGAPORE – Iron-ore has gone from high-flier to sinking star in a matter of weeks. The commodity that lit up the first half with a stunning rally dropped back below $100/t as supplies pick up, mills’ profitability falls and investors dump raw materials amid the escalating trade war. Most-active futures in Singapore, which retreated 10% last week, lost as much as 7% to $95.96/t, while the contract on the Dalian Commodity Exchange sank further after dropping into bear market territory. Miners’ shares fell. Iron-ore’s fortunes have shifted as the drivers that aided first-half gains – a supply squeeze coupled with booming demand – have weakened. Brazil’s Vale SA has been restoring more capacity after its dam burst, with exports rebounding. At the same time there are headwinds to consumption in China as the trade war rumbles on, with a gauge of mills’ profitability turning negative, and the yuan sinking beyond 7 per dollar for the first time since 2008. Iron ore is “past its peak pricing after the Vale event this year sent it into the clouds,” David Lennox, an analyst at Fat Prophets, said from Sydney. The yuan’s drop “feeds into the concerns about economic growth,” which are ultimately driven by uncertainty around US-China trade relations, he said. The escalating trade war between Washington and Beijing has dented investors’ appetite for raw materials, and the rise in tensions comes on the heels of data highlighting a manufacturing slowdown in key markets. Global steel output dropped in June from a month earlier, with declines seen in nations including China, Germany, the US, Russia and India, according to the World Steel Association. “We are outright bearish on demand,” said Marex Spectron analyst Hui Heng Tan. Steel margins have taken a turn for the worse, construction activity is facing a slowdown and steel inventories are higher, he said. Ore for September was trading at $95.96/t in Singapore at 1:35 p.m., heading for the lowest close since early June. Benchmark spot material has also suffered as the negatives stacked up, collapsing to $107.65/t on Friday. That’s down from a five-year high of $127.15 last month. BEARISH SIGNALS Among recent market signals: While lower prices aren’t good news for top miners including Vale, Rio Tinto, BHP and Fortescue Metals, they remain substantially higher than a year earlier and well above their costs of production. Shares in Fortescue slumped as much as 7.6% in Sydney.