Graphite producer Tirupati Graphite has noted considerable progress at its primary mining and processing projects in Madagascar, as well as at its downstream processing projects in India. The company is ramping up production to 3 000 t/y at the Sahamamy project, the first of six planned flake-graphite production plant modules to be built in Madagascar. It has achieved a production rate close to 75% of capacity since commissioning the plant in March and is on target to achieve full capacity in the fourth quarter of this year. It has achieved a target grade of more than 95% carbon and recovery of 85%. The first shipments of flake graphite were made in early May and total shipments to European, the US and the Indian markets, to date, are nearing 340 t. The company generated revenues of about $338 000, with a basket price of $991.50/t achieved, exceeding initial forecasts. Sales revenues are estimated to reach the targeted $3-million a year from 2020. Further, the company is also on target to commission a 6 000 t/y module at the Vatomina primary flake graphite project, in Madagascar, during the fourth quarter of the year. “With Sahamamy achieving almost 75% of its target production rate and the construction of the 6 000 t/y module in Vatomina well under way, we are on track to deliver the 2019 milestones on schedule and within budget in Madagascar,” Tirupati MD and executive chairperson Shishir Poddar said on Thursday. Meanwhile, Tirupati has also completed commissioning of the Patalganga flame retardant graphite project, in India. The company commissioned a 1 200 t/y flame retardant expandable graphite facility and a 1 500 t/y flake graphite finishing facility. A flame-retardant flake graphite product under the brand name CarboflameX has been launched in the European and Indian markets. The first shipments manufactured during trial runs were made in June, with about $60 000 in revenues achieved to date. Sales revenue is estimated to reach $3-million to $4-million a year from 2020. The company is advancing integrated downstream products and technology and graphene centre projects in India. Detailed feasibility studies have been completed and land allocation is in progress. Poddar commented that the start of production and launch of CarboflameX illustrated Tirupati’s ability to “climb up the value chain ladder, thereby firmly positioning ourselves as a specialist flake graphite company supplying to the extensive arena of fast-growing end markets”. Tirupati’s focus would now shift to achieving its 2020 target of building 27 000 t/y primary flake graphite capacity in Madagascar, and to begin the first phases of its downstream high-purity high-tech flake graphite products project and technology and graphene centre projects in India, Poddar indicated. “Our modular development strategy is now bearing fruits as we build significant positive cash flow. For that, I must thank our excellent teams in the UK, Madagascar and India, which are capable of delivering across our projects.”