PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland Resources Council (QRC) has welcomed a state government crackdown on extremist activists risking their lives. Police and Corrective Services Minister Mark Ryan on Tuesday announced that a new offence would be created aimed at stopping dangerous devices being used by extremists to shut down public thoroughfares and infrastructure, making it illegal to possess such devices. Police have also been given the power to search a person or vehicle suspected of carrying one of these devices. “No-one disputes the right of people to protest peacefully and lawfully. It is a bedrock principle of our democratic society. The changes to the law we are introducing will have no impact on the ability of anyone to protest lawfully. “But the actions we are witnessing now are not protests. What we are seeing now from these extremists is a flagrant disregard for the law and the rights of others. What we are seeing is a cohort who, by their actions, clearly take the view that their opinions and beliefs override the legal rights of others,” Ryan said. “These extremists wilfully disrupt the right of others to go about their daily lives without interruption. This is contrary to the shared values of our democratic society. And this extreme behaviour will not be tolerated.” QRC CEO Ian Macfarlane said the new offence was an important measure to protect everyday citizens simply going about their lives and doing their jobs. “QRC supports the right of every Queenslander to protest peacefully.  But by locking on to rail lines or blocking trains, activists clearly cross the line to becoming a danger to themselves, to the safety of train drivers and a menace to the wellbeing of the entire community. “There have been too many near misses from reckless activists who disregard safety by blocking railway lines or roads. Safety is the number one priority for everyone who works in or with the resources industry. “The careless actions of protestors who disrupt rail lines make a mockery of those safety standards.  But hypocritically at the same time those reckless activists are relying on the strict safety environment and skilled staff who work on the rail network to prevent a tragedy.” “Protestors cannot be allowed to flout the law at their own choosing and to continually disrupt lawful business and people going about their day-to-day lives. “This new power is an important step, but there is more to be done to address the range of disruptive and dangerous tactics activists are using on rail, roads and other infrastructure.”