PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Domestic gas deliveries from the Wheatstone natural gas facility, in Western Australia, have started, US major Chevron reported on Tuesday. With capacity to supply 200 TJ/d of natural gas, Wheatstone’s domestic gas will supply local households and businesses for decades through contracts with Western Australia customers. Third party independent analysis has found that the Wheatstone project will add more than A$180-billion to Australia’s gross domestic product, with almost A$6-billion a year from 2009 to 2040 forecast, and boost state and federal government revenues by almost A$50-billion - around A$1.5-billion a year. “Our investment in the Gorgon and Wheatstone natural gas facilities are a major contributor to Australia now being one of the world’s largest liquefied natural gas suppliers and has enabled the development of a secure domestic gas supply for the state’s industrial, commercial and household users,” said Chevron Australia MD Al Williams. “As a reliable and cost-effective way to generate electricity, cleaner-burning natural gas is a vital energy source for current and future energy needs. Importantly for Western Australia, domestic gas will power local jobs, local industry, local communities and provide government revenues for decades to come,” Williams said. At full capacity, the Chevron-operated Gorgon and Wheatstone natural gas facilities will be able to produce 500 TJ/d of domestic gas for the Western Australian market, enough to generate electricity for 4.3-million households. Premier Mark McGowan has welcomed the first gas deliveries from Wheatstone, noting that it meant residents in Western Australia could be confident of supply. He pointed out that Western Australia’s reliable and affordable gas supply could also help businesses in other Australian jurisdictions grow, if they move their businesses to the state. “Western Australia enjoys the lowest wholesale gas prices in the country, and there is a big opportunity for Eastern states businesses to relocate here to take advantage of the cost and reliability of our gas supply,” McGowan said. The resources industry has also welcomed the Chevron announcement, with the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) saying the start of the Wheatstone natural gas facility marked another significant milestone in the project’s development and would ensure that Western Australians continued to enjoy access to abundant supplies of cleaner-burning natural gas. “As the Australian Energy Market Operator noted in its Gas Statement of Opportunities report in December, Western Australia has more than enough gas to meet its export and domestic requirement,” said Appea CEO Dr Malcolm Roberts. “But, further investment is required to ensure that gas supply continues into the future. This means it is more important than ever that Western Australia maintain an attractive regime for oil and gas investment. Now is not the time to impose new regulatory burdens on the industry, that could endanger future investment and future supply.” Chamber of Minerals and Energy of Western Australia acting CEO Caroline Cherry said in addition to providing a reliable energy supply, Wheatstone was making a significant economic contribution to the long-term future of Western Australia through job creation, government revenue and procurement of local goods and services. “Western Australia has a great standing for its secure domestic gas supply and today’s announcement will further strengthen our reputation,” she said. “The start of domestic gas deliveries from Wheatstone will especially give businesses and industry the confidence that they will have access to an affordable and consistent supply of energy well into the future. It will also mean more affordable and reliable electricity for Western Australian homes.”