Brazil Mines and Energy Minister Bento Albuquerque has told company executives and international investors at the Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada conference, in Toronto, that the country is committed to attracting more foreign investment to the sector. The new government, which took office at the beginning of the year, will continue its initiatives to provide legal certainty and attract investment to the mining industry. “Our first priority currently is to articulate and structure policies to improve the environment for foreign investment by providing regulatory stability, legal certainty and outstanding governance.” The Minister said that the main goal of the government was providing the necessary groundwork for the long-term and sustainable growth of the mining industry in Brazil. “The Brazilian government is working with determination to implement the necessary reforms that are essential to creating a healthy environment able to transform the economic scenario, opening new opportunities for responsible and long-term investments.” In the face of the tragic events at the Brumadinho dam in late January, Albuquerque indicated that Brazil was reviewing its legislation to fix safety parameters for investments. “Brazilian government has not spared any effort to support the victims of Brumadinho, while at the same time working hard to make its legislation more secure.” As part of its initiatives to attract investment, Brazil is launching an online system for geological information. The new Jazida.com system provides online access to geological data generated by the National Mining Agency, the Geological Survey of Brazil and environmental entities on a single platform, bringing more consistent and comprehensive search results about Brazilian mineral resources to investors and analysts. “We are opening the Brazilian treasure chest to world-class exploration opportunities,” Agency for Technological Development of the Brazilian Mining Industry director Roberto Xavier commented in a statement.