Machine and automation solutions supplier Andritz has been named the winner of #DisruptMining 2019, earning itself an opportunity to negotiate a contract of investment of up to C$1-million with Canadian gold miner Goldcorp. The company has developed a continuous way of training artificial intelligence (AI) to operate a mineral processing facility using Andritz’s digital twin. The AI is trained to respond to a variety of situations, making it capable of adapting to changing inputs and improving recovery time. Andritz explains that the trained AI's ability to quickly process information and recommend data-driven solutions will allow for the improvement of the operation, such as start-up and shutdown, and assist operators to achieve plant-wide optimization. “We are excited to be part of Goldcorp's success to bring autonomous plant operation to mineral processing and we look forward to getting to work," says business development manager Sohail Nazari. "Congratulations to our #DisruptMining winner Andritz and to all our finalists and semi-finalists. Innovation doesn't stop or start with one idea, one technology, or one company. For the mining industry to reach the demands and potential of the 21st century, every company must step up and innovate. We must all be safer, more efficient, and responsible and we'll get results faster through collaboration and the kind of break-through thinking the #DisruptMining platform is meant to uncover for our industry," comments Goldcorp president and CEO David Garofalo. Meanwhile, Garofalo has announced that net proceeds of C$200 000 from the #DisruptMining live finale will be granted toward mining, innovation and technology scholarships to the University of British Columbia. In addition to the scholarships, Goldcorp and KPMG announced a C$50 000 donation to Hope Air, a national charity arranging free transportation to medical appointments for Canadians living in remote communities that would otherwise be challenged to receive specialized medical care. #DisruptMining offers entrepreneurs a platform to bring disruptive and exponential technologies to the sector. About 90 submissions were received for #DisruptMining 2019. The semifinalists showcased their ideas during the Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada conference, currently under way in Toronto.