PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Exploration expenditure across Australia rose by 24% in 2018, to A$2.2-billion, new data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) has shown. The data show that gold attracted the lion’s share of exploration spend, with nearly 41%, or A$891-million, of exploration spend spent on gold exploration during 2018. In the quarter ended December, coal exploration expenditure increased by 44% compared with the previous corresponding period, while copper exploration expenditure was up 40% and copper, silver, lead-zinc, nickel and cobalt combined was up 30%. Petroleum exploration expenditure rose 39% compared to the same quarter last year. “Australia’s exploration sector is a world leader with initiatives such as the MinEx Cooperative Research Centre developing innovative technologies to identify new world-class deposits of copper, lithium, and rare earth elements that are used widely in modern consumer products, energy grids and transport systems,” said Minerals Council of Australia CEO Tania Constable. “Exploration activity is fundamental to the future success of the Australian mining industry, but this success is not guaranteed. Policy-makers need to do more to ensure that Australia can take advantage of the growing demand from China, India and South-East Asia,” she added. “Australia’s minerals sector must have policy certainty from federal and state governments to ensure Australia can develop its mineral potential into the mines of the future.” The Queensland Resources Council (QRC) has echoed the call for policy certainty, with CEO Ian Macfarlane saying that if explorers were taking the punt to invest in exploration, they must have certainty that all subsequent project investments will be assessed fairly under a stable and transparent set of rules. “Queensland had a wake-up call with the recently released Fraser Institute rankings showing the state had fallen a place to number 13 in terms of investment attractiveness,” Macfarlane said. “At the same time Western Australia secured the number two ranking. Queensland can’t take its future success for granted. The resources sector employs 316 000 Queenslanders either directly or in supporting industries.” He pointed out that the Queensland budget would be in the red by A$4.6-billion this year alone without the royalty taxes from the Queensland resources sector. The majority of those royalty taxes come from coal exports. “To keep these benefits flowing to all Queenslanders we need a strong resources sector, underpinned by new investments and new projects to deliver new jobs.”