JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Empowered diversified miner Exxaro Resources achieved a robust financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2018. The company reported record coal production, sales and exports, while its revenue increased by 12% year-on-year to R25.5-billion. Its earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation (Ebitda) increased by R4.5-billion year-on-year to R7-billion. Headline earnings a share rose to R26.72, from R5.02 in 2017. Exxaro declared a final cash dividend a share of R5.55, and a total dividend a share of R10.85 – a 55% year-on-year increase. CEO Mxolisi Mgojo on Thursday said the company's earnings growth had been as a result of one-off costs in the prior year, such as the black economic empowerment transaction costs which were fully expensed in 2017. He added, however, that "even at an adjusted level, core Ebitda grew to R7.3-billion from R7.2-billion.” The R7-billion Ebitda was sufficient to cover the R1.9-billion increase in capital expenditure (capex), which Mgojo attributed to advancing the Grootegeluk 6 project to Phase 2 and projects at the Belfast mine, which are ahead of schedule and will deliver first coal in first half of this year. The group’s net debt of R3.9-billion at year-end translates to a net debt to Ebitda cover of one, which is well within Exxaro's internal targets. Mgojo said the R69-million cash-positive position at the previous year-end was an anomaly, given a number of transactions in the year that resulted in one-off proceeds, and that the net debt position as at December 31 is a more realistic marker. Meanwhile, Exxaro's all-time-high coal production volumes, sales and exports were supported by positive factors, such as increased supply to Eskom, mainly for the Medupi power station, and strong export demand internationally, Mgojo said. To further optimise its portfolio, Exxaro successfully sold its noncore Manyeka mine to Universal Coal for R90-million, with the gain on the disposal amounting to R69-million. Further, the disposal of NBC, concluded in October 2018, resulted in a gain of R102-million. Mgojo commented that, the recently announced transaction with Wescoal for the disposal of Arnot was “a landmark for the country, with former employees being empowered for the very first time, with 50% ownership participation”. He added that, from an acquisition perspective, opportunities still exist in South Africa, contrary to the global situation where quality, scale coal assets are becoming harder to come by. Looking ahead, Mgojo said Exxaro’s short-term focus remains on South Africa and supporting Eskom’s turnaround plan. “[In the] longer term, we also intend to pursue opportunities in other emerging markets where coal-fired power plants are being commissioned.” He concluded that, “as the foremost coal producer in the domestic market, [Exxaro] remains focused on delivering sustainable growth for all stakeholders and will continue helping to power South Africa’s economic growth”.