The Minerals Council South Africa has filed an application for the judicial review and setting aside of certain clauses of Mining Charter 3, which was published in September. The decision follows after the council’s board engaged in ongoing attempts to reach a compromise with Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe on certain provisions that are “problematic for the industry” and could be “detrimental to its sustainability”. The Minerals Council has delayed bringing the application forth, in the hopes that those discussions would be successful but, given the peremptory 180-day time bar imposed by the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, the council was obliged to launch the review proceedings on March 26, despite the fact that the discussions are ongoing and may yet bear fruit. CEO Roger Baxter noted that the council remained fully committed to the transformation of the mining sector in South Africa, with the aim of achieving job creation, economic growth and competitiveness and social upliftment. “A transformed, growing and competitive mining sector would be a catalyst for South Africa’s development and critical for the realisation of the ambitions of the National Development Plan. “However, these goals will only be realised through a minerals policy framework that conforms to the rule of law and principles of legality and by administration action which is lawful, reasonable and procedurally fair and consistent in all respects, with provisions of the country’s legislation.” Baxter added that the rule of law, regulatory uncertainty and the fair and even-handed administration of laws are of the utmost importance in sustaining the industry and the economy as a whole. The council believes most aspects of the charter represent a reasonable and workable framework, but said the fact that the charter does not fully recognise the continuing consequences of previous empowerment transactions, particularly in respect of mining right renewals and the transfers of these rights, remains untenable. “Not only does this provision have a severely dampening effect on the attractiveness of mining in investors’ eyes, but it also breaches the declaratory order on the matter issued by the North Gauteng High Court in April 2018. “The Minister has been kept fully apprised of the Minerals Council’s intentions. We continue to seek a solution to the current impasse that respects the outcome of the High Court judgment on continuing consequences and provides a level playing field for companies in this regard,” said Baxter.