Global power company Cummins on Wednesday officially launched the “Power Hub”, its new multimillion-rand premises in the business area of the Waterfall Logistics Precinct, in Waterfall City, in Midrand. The new premises has enabled the company to consolidate its various services and sales business units in South Africa in one strategic location. Speaking at the unveiling, Cummins Southern Africa MD Racheal Njoroge indicated why the new South African headquarters is called the Power Hub. “We continue to deliver by powering customers' success though innovation and dependability; we continue to demonstrate the power of Cummins to customers through delivering world-class sales services and support; and the facility represents the power behind a global organisation that is able to continue to invest in the region and signals our long-term intentions in the region.” The 15 355 m2 premises is the manifestation of a R350-million investment and the culmination of a three-year project. Cummins chairperson and CEO Tom Linebarger extolled that the project was completed on time and on budget. Moreover, he highlighted that it showcased the company’s commitment to and confidence in South Africa and Africa. “We invest in Africa during the good times, and during the bad times.” The hub comprises the Cummins Southern Africa regional headquarters, the Master Rebuild Centre (MRC), the Africa Learning Centre and Gauteng Operations. This consolidates the company’s products and solutions under one roof. The central hub will provide power solutions to customers across the Southern African region and brings together the company’s technical expertise from mining, power systems, automotive and technical training. The hub’s training centre has capacity to train nearly 100 students a month using 35 variants of Cummins products. Cummins Distribution Business president Tony Satterthwaite highlighted that, last year, over 1 300 people were technically trained in the company’s old facilities, with the new hub set to increase this by more than 30% this year. Notably, the facility boasts the latest technology to cater to industry needs, including a 3 500 hp AVL Dyno Test Cell that will test some of Cummins' largest engines to full power; a precision-driven spray booth that is big enough to accommodate Cummins' most powerful engines’ paint applications; and an environment-friendly water purification plant and an efficient wastewater treatment system that recycles 80% of the water used in the MRC. The hub will also feature progressive build processes that are expected to considerably reduce the overall build time while improving output. Moreover, with this facility being part of the Cummins Distribution Business Unit, it will focus on sales and aftermarket services. The MRC is a focal point of Cummins' support to the mining industry, as it provides rebuilt engines to ensure that customers have access to a reliable and consistent supply of engines for uninterrupted operations. The company’s relocation from the Kelvin and Longmeadow offices to the Waterfall Logistics Precinct is highlighted as a strategic move, placing it at the epicentre of one of Gauteng’s business hubs. Moreover, it gives the company optimal visibility, with Njoroge extolling that the offices are visible from “one of the busiest highways in South Africa, if not Africa.” The hub aims to engender ease of business dealings for customers, with Njoroge enthusing that it will enhance the company’s business capacity for customers. The hub has space for 250 employees. It has been designed using the Cummins Smart Office Concept (CSO), to create a space that enhances internal collaboration and encourages engagement, thereby enabling a solution-orientated approach. This includes elements such as private meetings rooms, a spacious layout and a treadmill desk. Further, in line with the company’s commitment to diversity and inclusion, it houses elements such as a meditation room. The opening was commemorated at a ceremony attended by global Cummins’ representatives, customers, and government representatives. Linebarger undertook the ribbon cutting, while the plaque commemorating the occasion was unveiled by Njoroge. Notably, the launch coincides with the company’s centennial year. “As we embark on the next 100 years, we look forward to Cummins playing an increasingly important role in Africa and South Africa,” enthused Satterthwaite.