KOLKATA (miningweekly.com) – India’s Coal Ministry is working out contours of a policy intervention to ensure rapid operationalisation of coal blocks to be put up for auction over the next few months. Ministry officials said that consultations had already been held with various coal sector stakeholders, including governments of coal-bearing states to address issues leading to delays in getting coal blocks into production and veered round to the necessity of tweaking policies to reduce gestation periods for operationalisation of coal blocks allotted through the auction route. Among the measures being considered to be put into play was opening up a “single window” for securing all mandatory clearances from state and central governments.  The Coal Ministry was also favouring a present sequence of securing all mandatory approvals from the central government before the state government could execute a mining lease be dispensed. The Ministry has sought that state government simplify rules and open up a window for automatic grant of a mining lease immediately on bagging a block at the auctions and central approvals could be secure post facto. The planned policy intervention was significant, considering that it comes with the auction process on for allocation of 27 coal blocks to private miners and another 15 coal blocks to be allotted under the preferential allotment dispensation to central and state government undertakings. At the same time, the Coal Ministry has commenced identification of additional coal blocks, which could be put up for auction before December, exclusively for commercial coal mining by private domestic miners as well as international resource majors. This comes close on the heels of the Indian government opening up commercial coal mining for international miners through 100% foreign direct investments (FDI) and thereby enabling global majors to bid and execute coal mining projects through wholly owned Indian subsidiaries. “Hundred per cent commercial coal mining has been permitted. We will roll it out by December 2019. We will invite global players and for this 100% FDI will lead to more investors in coal mining and induction of better technology,” Coal and Mines Minister, Prahlad Joshi said.