PERTH (miningweekly.com) – A new report by Geoscience Australia has shown that Australia could a world-leader in the supply of hydrogen. “We have the resources, know-how, infrastructure and research base to produce and supply clean hydrogen to the world, and this report shows every Australian state and territory has regions with excellent prospects for hydrogen production,” federal Resources Minister Matt Canavan said. “There are more than 200 000 km2 of land rated as having great prospects for supporting renewable hydrogen production, confirming our potential for hydrogen production.” Canavan used his trade mission to the Republic of Korea to release Geoscience Australia’s report for the National Hydrogen Strategy, highlighting prospective hydrogen production regions of Australia, which identifies the regions in Australia that have high potential for hydrogen production. The Minister has also signed a Letter of Intent that Australia will collaborate with South Korea and develop a Hydrogen Action Plan by the end of the year. “I’ll be using my time in South Korea to promote our outstanding potential as a hydrogen supplier with the South Korean government and company executives. I’ll explain how Australia has been investing heavily in hydrogen projects and outline our National Hydrogen Strategy which will map out the steps we can take to develop a sustainable and commercial hydrogen industry.” Under the Letter of Intent with South Korea, the planned Hydrogen Action Plan will promote hydrogen cooperation under existing energy and resources bilateral agreements. Canavan will further reinforce Australia’s capacity to grow its hydrogen sector when he addresses the Hydrogen Energy Ministerial Meeting in Tokyo. The Australian government has already invested more than A$140-million into hydrogen projects, partnering with industry to develop tangible solutions that are important for bringing down energy prices. The National Hydrogen Strategy is expected to be released by the end of 2019.