PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Federal Resources and Northern Australia Minister Matt Canavan on Friday announced that A$1.9-million will be spent at the waste rock dump at the Rum Jungle Creek South, near Darwin, to ensure that the site continues to meet national standards for radiation protection. “The waste rock dump cover system requires maintenance to ensure its future integrity. The maintenance work will ensure areas around the site, including recreational areas near Rum Jungle, are safe to visit and meet international standards,” Canavan said. The maintenance is part of a bilateral agreement between the Australian government and the Northern Territory government for the management of the former Rum Jungle mine site. Under the agreement, the Commonwealth has provided A$10-million in funding to support finalising rehabilitation planning for the Rum Jungle mine and satellite sites, including Rum Jungle Creek South. “We will continue to work with the Northern Territory government to ensure the highest standards of radiation protection safety are kept,” Canavan said. Northern Territory Senator Sam McMahon said the maintenance works would also provide employment opportunities. “Ensuring the site meets the highest safety standards will help continue capacity building for Traditional Owners and local businesses during the maintenance and beyond. Public access to the site will be closed during the maintenance,” McMahon said. The current maintenance work will continue until the end of the year and will improve the existing safety coverage system. The Northern Territory government has been working with the federal government and traditional owners since 2009 to develop a preferred rehabilitation strategy for the former Rum Jungle mine site. The mine produced 3 530 t of uranium oxide and 20 000 t of copper concentrate between 1954 and 1971, but resulted in significant environmental impacts due to acid rock drainage, which resulted in the pollution of the East Branch of the Finniss River. Some A$18.6-million was spent on site rehabilitation between 1983 and 1986.