A definitive feasibility study (DFS) for the Kobada project – a greenfield gold mine development in Mali – is expected to be completed by March next year, and developer African Gold Group (AGG) says construction could start soon after as most permits are in place. The project has a 2016 feasibility study with a stated resource of 2.2-million ounces and AGG is in the process of upgrading the geological model and understanding of the orebody to double the production rate to 100 000 oz/y. A DFS will incorporate results of an additional expected 15 000 m of diamond drilling and 3 000 m of reverse circulation in-fill drilling to gain a better geological understanding of the main shear zone and additional highly prospective exploratory targets. “By carrying out the in-fill drilling programme, which we expect to complete in early December, we will have a comprehensive understanding of the geological structures and the mineralogy, the knowledge of which is paramount for the design of the process plant in order to treat every type of ore present at Kobada,” comments VP for exploration, Andreas Rompel. The DFS will also deliver a processing plant and mine infrastructure design and detailed equipment lists, as well as an updated environmental impact statement. “There is no doubt that there is huge upside potential in the gold resource yet to be drilled and this solid foundation will enable us to develop a modular approach to construction that will see an initial 50 000 oz plant be constructed followed by an expansion to 100 000 oz as the resource increases. With 30 km of shear zones yet to be drilled there is no doubt we are sitting on a significant resource and I am looking forward to taking this project through the DFS and construction phase into full production,” says COO Danny Callow. Since the beginning of August, geological consultants Minxcon have mobilised to site to incorporate recent drilling and regional geological data into the model and review close to 30 000 m of existing diamond drill core. In addition, Amco drilling contractors are mobilising to site to begin the next phase of drilling, and SGS, an international assay laboratory, has been awarded the contract to fast-track the assays. Overseeing this phase of the project is SENET, part of the international DRA Group. SENET is one of the most experienced engineering, procurement and construction management companies operating in West Africa and has been involved in dozens of projects over the past 15 years in Mali and neighbouring countries.