PERTH (miningweekly.com) – An independent audit by Australia’s chief scientist, Dr Alan Finkel, has found the National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority (Nopsema) was applying stringent environmental regulation in considering applications for oil exploration in the Great Australian Bight. The report commissioned by the federal government to ensure public confidence in Nopsema’s processes was released on Friday, finding that the watchdog was a "competent regulator", and had appropriate processes and procedures in place to meet its regulatory requirements under the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas (Environment) Regulations 2009. The report also found that Nopsema had appropriate processes and procedures in place to assess environment plans against relevant, sufficient and complete scientific and technical information. “This audit delivers on the government’s election commitment to provide the community with an additional level of assurance about any consideration of exploration in the Great Australian Bight,” Resources Minister Matt Canavan said. “It demonstrates that Australians can be confident that offshore oil and gas activities are regulated by Nopsema in a way that meets our stringent environmental regulations, and that the environmental risks and potential impacts of a proposed activity are taken into account.” Minister for the Environment Sussan Ley said the maintenance of the strongest environmental safeguards and improved public understanding of Nopsema processes were key considerations. “It is important that this report provides confidence to the community and confidence to the government that Nopsema is considering all risks and the values of the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act and supporting regulations,” Ley said. A 2018 study by the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) found that successful oil exploration in the Great Australian Bight could see the creation of more than 2 000 jobs in South Australia and generate over A$7-billion a year in average tax revenue to federal and state governments over the next four decades. The indirect benefits of the activity and the associated tax revenue could see almost 5 000 jobs created across Australia in the period between 2020 and 2060. Finkel’s study identified opportunities for Nopsema, titleholders and government to provide additional assurances to local communities to improve the public’s understanding of the offshore oil and gas regulatory regime. The Ministers have directed their departments to adopt the audit findings and consider how governments and agencies can better communicate how the regulatory regime manages risks to the environment. Canavan will also write to Nopsema and the Appea to request they implement the opportunities identified in the audit. Meanwhile, Nopsema will continue its assessment process for the proposed exploration activities in the Bight and make a decision independent of government, consistent with the legislation.