JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Specialty chemicals company Clariant has launched a new centre of excellence in Johannesburg, South Africa, and has also concluded a new partnership, with both of these measures aimed at supporting the growing African mining industry. During a tour of its facilities on Thursday, Clariant sub-Saharan Africa head Dries Lategan indicated that the laboratories located at the centre of excellence would enable Clariant to provide tailored chemical filtration and separation solutions for mining companies. “We can do metallurgical testwork with state-of-the-art equipment and supply accurate and timeous results for mining customers.’’ Notably, the centre ties into Clariant’s commitment to sustainability, and products will bear the company’s EcoTain label, which indicates that products have undergone a systematic, in-depth screening process using 36 criteria in all three sustainability dimensions of social, environmental and economic. Swiss-based Clariant has operations across the world, including in South Africa through Clariant Southern Africa. Lategan said the company last year made a strategic decision to bring expertise and technology that had historically been focused on Europe to a more regional location. Its new centre will serve as a regional hub for mining operators in Africa, serving mines in South Africa, sub-Saharan Africa, the rest of Africa and even beyond the continent, if needed. The investment enables Clariant to become a stronger player in the African mining markets and to better support customers by improving research and supply chain capabilities. The proximity of the centre allows Clariant to provide high value to a growing mining sector in Africa. Lategan said this would speed up delivery times, as samples would not have to be transported to a centre across the world for testing. Meanwhile, Clariant has also concluded a partnership with ChemQuest to increase metallurgical efficiencies for the beneficiation of minerals. ChemQuest, owned by SNF Floerger since 2009, is now a distributor of the Clariant Mining Solutions range of products. The agreement concentrates on providing solutions-based specialty chemicals that address challenges experienced specifically in the copper, platinum, gold and base metal mining sectors. Countries seen as focus markets are South Africa, Zambia, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Zimbabwe. “We are delighted to have partnered with Clariant Mining Solutions. This partnership with one of the world’s largest specialty chemical manufacturers and solution providers, allows us to jointly be the leading supplier of collectors, frothers and custom-developed products and services, formulated for the extraction of valuable minerals in Africa,” said ChemQuest MD Heystek du Plessis in a statement issued on Thursday.