Senior gold miner Kinross Gold on Tuesday announced that two senior members of its leadership team would leave the company by mutual agreement, as part of a cost management and efficiency improvement drive. Senior VP and COO Lauren Roberts and senior VP for human resources Gina Jardine would depart from Kinross. Paul Tomory would now be executive VP and chief technical officer and broaden his portfolio to take on leadership of regional operations. “Tomory, who led the successful completion of the Tasiast Phase 1 expansion, and development of our project pipeline and strategic business optimisation, will assume additional responsibility for regional operations. I am confident Paul will continue to maintain the excellent safety and operational track records that we hold as core company strengths and deliver on our project development goals,” commented president and CEO Paul Rollinson. The senior VPs of Kinross’ three operating regions – the Americas, Russia and West Africa – will also have increased accountability for the operational success of their respective regions. “On behalf of the company, I would like to thank Lauren and Gina for their significant contributions to Kinross,” said Rollinson. “During his long and successful career at Kinross, Lauren was a relentless champion of safety and delivered many accomplishments, including achieving our annual production and cost guidance over the past two years. He provided strong operational leadership and was instrumental in the success of our sites across all regions, from permitting, to operations and closure. As head of HR, Gina strategically advanced our approach to talent, executive development and succession. She provided strong leadership to our HR functions across Kinross and headed the development of our culture and employee engagement through the launch of our People Commitments. I wish both Lauren and Gina the very best in their next roles.” Besides Rollinson and Tomory, the Kinross senior leadership team also includes executive VP for corporate development and external relations, and chief legal officer Geoff Gold and senior VP and CFO Andrea Freeborough. To support the streamlined senior leadership team, Kinross has created a leadership advisory team that will consist of experienced leaders with diverse perspectives and functional expertise to provide direct input and insight on organisational issues, corporate strategy and key business decisions.