Katanga Mining increased its copper cathode production to 57 175 t in the first quarter of this year, compared with the 49 770 t produced in the fourth quarter of 2018, but output of cobalt contained in hydroxide decreased to 3 511 t, from the 4 646 t produced in the fourth quarter of 2018. The company’s 75%-owned Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) subsidiary Kamoto Copper Company (KCC) temporarily suspended the export and sale of cobalt in the fourth quarter of last year owing to the presence of uranium detected in the cobalt hydroxide at levels exceeding the acceptable limit allowed for export. On April 25, KCC resumed the export and sale of a limited quantity that complied with both international and local DRC transport regulations with respect to uranium levels. While KCC has, in coordination with other entities, been working on a long-term technical solution in the form of the construction of an ion exchange plant, it has also been exploring various alternative interim solutions, both operational and regulatory, resulting in the restart of the export and sale of a limited quantity of cobalt in April. Meanwhile, throughout the quarter, Katanga made progress on its various projects. This includes cobalt debottling projects, which are expected to be completed during the second quarter. The objective is to upgrade the existing cobalt plant design to reduce the bottlenecks by modifying the precipitation, thickening and filtration and drying and bagging processes. Dry commissioning of two of the three filter presses has been completed. The third filter press commissioning is awaiting arrival of the supplier commissioning team during the next planned maintenance shutdown, scheduled for May. The magnesium oxide plant commissioning is complete. Commissioning of the first and second cobalt dryers has also started and is expected to be completed during the second quarter. Meanwhile, work is also ongoing with regard to an acid plant, a sulphuric acid plant, a sulphur dioxide production plant and a steam turbine generator at KCC, all of which is intended to improve the reliability of the supply of these reagents to the whole ore leach (WOL) project processing circuits and provide additional power for use in the WOL plant. Further to a continuation of design work on the acid plant, major earthworks are complete, civil works are progressing and deliveries of major long-lead items continue to arrive on site. Commissioning is expected to start at the end of this year.