PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The resources sector has warned of the detrimental effects a Bill to ban thermal coal mining in the Galilee Basin, in Queensland, would have on the economy. The Galilee Basin (Coal Prohibition Bill) has been introduced by the Greens into the Federal Senate, and if made into law, will see the permanent banning of all coal mining in the Galilee Basin, and effectively stop the $16.5-billion Carmichael coal mine from starting operations. The Queensland Resources Council (QRC) said on Friday that if passed, the Bill would cost jobs while having no impact on the global demand for thermal coal. “This Bill doesn’t stack up. It would be little more than an act of self-sabotage which would cost Queenslanders their jobs for no reason and for no reduction in the global use of coal,” QRC CEO Ian Macfarlane said. “The global demand for coal is strong, and coal is forecast to remain at about 40% of total power generation in the Asia Pacific by the year 2040 under a scenario modelled by the International Energy Agency. “If the Greens’ bid to ban coal in Queensland was successful that would simply mean the demand for coal would be met from other countries with lower quality coal, which would in turn lead to higher emissions,” Macfarlane said. He noted that a ban on coal mines in the Galilee Basin would come at the loss of an enormous economic opportunity for Central and North Queensland. “Figures from the Office of the Chief Economist in Canberra show that if the six major coal projects in the Galilee Basin were to proceed that would support 18 275 jobs in construction. “On top of that QRC estimates that even if just a quarter of the coal capacity in the Galilee was developed that would add up to A$290-million in royalty taxes paid to the Queensland government each year.” The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) has also urged the Senate to reject the Bill, with CEO Tania Constable saying the legislation would result in increased emissions. “When Australia’s global competitiveness as a destination for mining investment is already under threat, this Bill would further damage Australia’s investment attractiveness and create significant sovereign risk,” Constable said. “The Bill undermines rigorous and thorough approvals processes at both state and Commonwealth level with which all major mining projects must comply. Banning coal mining in the Galilee Basin will do nothing to reduce emissions.” Constable points to research by the International Energy Agency, amongst others, that notes thermal coal demand would remain strong in Asia as many countries seek to rise up from energy poverty. “Without Australia’s top-quality coal, these countries will source lower-quality coal from other suppliers. This means that banning our world-class coal exports will have no environmental benefit and would in fact increase emissions overall from the use of lower-quality coal. “Instead of engaging in blinkered, politically-driven stunts, the Greens should focus on constructive efforts to ensure Australian coal is used more sustainably through innovation and carbon capture and storage and support regional communities and jobs.”