Minerals Council South Africa CEO Roger Baxter on Friday called for urgent intervention by the Ministers of Police and Mineral Resources and Energy to investigate the violent assaults by heavily armed intruders on mining company targets, especially smelt houses. The industry has for years struggled with illegal miners, but over the past year, attacks on plants to steal concentrate or smelted gold have increased sharply. In the past year, the gold industry has suffered nine significant attacks that have seen employees and security personnel held hostage and assaulted.  Two people have been murdered in two attacks, the most recent being an attack at Harmony Gold’s Kalgold plant on Friday morning. The JSE-listed mining company said that a reaction unit superviser, employed by a contracted security company, was fatally wounded in the attack.  No gold was stolen. In October, a gang of about 16 to 20 men armed with automatic rifles took 11 company employees hostage at DRDGold’s Ergo operation near Brakpan, east of Johannesburg, to gain access to the gold plant. DRDGold chief security officer Bart Coetzee was shot dead, and the gang escaped with 17 kg of gold in concentrate worth about R12-million. Sibanye-Stillwater has also been raided over the past year, but gang was driven away by security after a fierce gun battle. Baxter said that these violent assaults were largely driven by organised crime and that a lack of resources and capacity in the police to deal with the attacks was major threat to the industry. “Essentially, the industry is under siege. These crimes are hurting South Africa’s investment and economic prospects and urgent action is required.” Baxter has reiterated the industry’s call for a special policing unit to be established to deal with crimes of this nature. The dedicated unit that was previously in place was disbanded some years ago. The Minerals Council extended its condolences to the family and colleagues of the security official that was murdered at Kalgold.