PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Joint venture partners Gold Road Resources and Gold Fields have officially opened the Gruyere gold mine, in Western Australia, following the production of its first gold bar at the end of June this year. Average annual production over the life of the mine is expected to reach some 300 000 oz/y, at an all-in sustaining costs of about A$1 025/oz over a 12-year mine life. The project is expected to meet its first production target of between 75 000 oz and 100 000 oz for 2019. “Gruyere’s development has been an amazing journey for Gold Road and is a testament to the company’s vision and persistence,” said Gold Road MD and CEO Duncan Gibbs. “We made the discovery six years ago, and today we have opened a greenfield operation that is the first to produce gold in the prospective Yamarna Belt. Gold road is proud that our exploration success has led to the creation of employment and contracting opportunities in regional Western Australia, including for the Yila people with whom we have forged a strong relationship.” Gibbs said that the focus would now be on working with Gold Fields to deliver sustainable value from Gruyere while the exploration team focused on further unlocking the gold potential of the Yamarna Belt. Gold Fields executive VP for Australasia Stuart Mathews said that the company was excited to have Gruyere as part of its portfolio of mines in Western Australia, which also includes the St Ives, Granny Smith and Agnew operations. “Gold Fields has a demonstrated  commitment to Western Australia and Gruyere is a good example of a gold mining operation which provides long-term jobs, sustained industry investment and ongoing spend and support to the local economy.” Western Australian Mines and Energy Minister Bill Johnston said that the project was vitally important to Western Australia, not only because of its gold output, but also because it will provide around 250 jobs over the next 12 years and open up a new gold province. "Gruyere is a powerful example of the value of the Exploration Incentive Scheme's flagship Co-funded Drilling Program, a long-standing initiative that the government continues to support. "This project is one of about 25 discoveries that have benefited from the scheme, other gold projects include the Tropicana East, Handpump and Dusk til Dawn gold projects. "The Co-funded Drilling Program has offered funding to more than 940 projects since 2009, and allowed more of our state to be explored for the benefit of all Western Australians."