PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Rare earths miner Lynas has selected Kalgoorlie as the location for its new cracking and leaching plant, after inking an initial memorandum of understanding with the city of Kalgoorlie-Boulder in September this year. Lynas in May announced plans for a cracking and leaching plant in Western Australia as part of its 2025 growth plans, with the Malaysian government earlier this year also renewing the company’s operating license in Malaysia on the condition that its cracking and leaching operations in that country be closed down within the next four years. The company on Monday said that Kalgoorlie was selected from the two shortlisted locations in the Goldfields region, following extensive due diligence. The new cracking and leaching plant will upgrade the rare earth concentrate from the Mt Weld operation, which is currently exported to Malaysia, with Lynas also exploring opportunities for the next stage of processing in Western Australia. “We are excited to announce Kalgoorlie as the location for our robots, value-added processing facility in Western Australia. Kalgoorlie is a terrific city and an ideal location for our new cracking and leaching plant. We are excited to contribute to economic development in Kalgoorlie-Boulder,” said Lynas CEO and MD Amanda Lacaze. Western Australian Premier Mark McGowan on Monday said that Lynas’ decision was a fantastic result for Kalgoorlie, and the Goldfields region in general. "This investment in infrastructure, the local workforce and research, is a key example of how the WA Government is working with industry to diversify the economy and deliver jobs of the future. "Kalgoorlie has a long and rich history in mining innovation, so there is no better place for Lynas, and other multi-national businesses, to set up their processing operations. "I'm pleased Lynas will continue to work with Curtin University and the Western Australian School of Mines to enhance knowledge and technologies surrounding the processing of critical minerals in Australia and continue to upskill Western Australians for these important local roles."