JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Mining and marketing company Assore on Tuesday reported 20% higher headline earnings to R2.92-billion in the six months to December 31, buoyed by an improved price basket and weaker exchange rate. Assore's jointly controlled Assmang recorded headline earnings of R4.29-billion, an increase of 23% on a 100% basis, which made a R2.14-billion headline earnings contribution. Assmang which mines both iron and manganese ore in the Northern Cape, has manganese smelting facilities at Cato Ridge in KwaZulu-Natal and holds 54.36% of Sakura Ferroalloys, a manganese smelter in Malaysia. Assore owns 100% of Dwarsrivier underground chrome mine in Limpopo, which contributed R327-million to group operational earnings. Following the 60% increase in the interim dividend last year, the interim dividend has been held at R10 a share to build reserves for future growth ambitions. Manganese ore prices were higher for both 44% and 37% manganese grades and sales of iron-ore and chrome ore were lower on unforeseen inland logistical challenges, while sales volumes for manganese ore and alloys were higher. The index price achieved for iron-ore was stable while the lump premium increased. Increases in demand out of China for high quality ores continued to play out well for Assore’s quality product portfolio, said Assore CEO Charles Walters. However, a declining trend in steel prices and reduced steel mill profitability in China, seen towards the end of the period, is anticipated to result in a swing back to ore with a lower iron content, leading to a narrowing of price differentials between the various grades of ore available in the market, he added. IRON-ORE While the average index price for iron-ore remained stable at $69/t, the lump premium increased by 36% to an average of $20/t, due mainly to Chinese steel mills using increased volumes of higher grade ore to meet environmental restrictions. In addition, there was an increase in the premium achieved for spot sales. Assmang’s iron-ore operations achieved total production of 8.74-million tons and total sales volumes were 8.75-million tons, 4% lower owing to logistical challenges experienced on the export rail line to Saldanha. MANGANESE AND ALLOYS Robust levels of Chinese steel production, up 6,6% year-on-year in 2018, resulted in higher alloy production, which continued to support elevated price indices for both higher grade 44% manganese ore and medium grade 37% manganese ore. However, the world manganese alloy market was in oversupply and elevated prices of manganese ore led to manganese alloy production cutbacks. While Assmang’s total sales volumes of manganese ore increased by 3% to 1.6-million tons, export volumes from Saldanha were negatively impacted by the logistical challenges experienced on the export rail line, which necessitated the use of the road network. CHROME ORE Increased beneficiation plant utilisation gave rise to a 7% increase in chrome production volumes at Dwarsrivier to 765 000 t, but Chinese markets for chrome ore and ferrochrome were weaker, resulting in the average price decreasing by 10% to $186/t for 44% chrome content material. Sales volumes decreased by 5% to 757 000 t owing to the logistical challenges, which resulted mainly from community unrest in the vicinity of the mine, as well as congestion experienced in the port of Maputo during the latter quarter of the year. Dwarsrivier thus recorded a reduction in turnover of 8% and a reduction in earnings of 26%. Capital expenditure amounted to R214-million of which R92.6-million was replacement and the balance being on improving efficiencies and compliance. The group increased its interest in IronRidge Resources, an Australian minerals exploration company listed on London’s Alternative Investment Market from 28,9% to 31,27% in November 2018, following a rights issue to the value of R56.6-million. IronRidge has a portfolio of gold, lithium, bauxite and iron ore prospects in Africa and Australia. During the current period, the activities of IronRidge were focused mainly on lithium and gold exploration prospecting in Ghana, Chad and Ivory Coast. OUTLOOK As world economic growth momentum has started to slw, the company’s 2019 growth forecast is marginally lower. The expected decline in growth is reflected in the slowdown observed in some of the major advanced economies as a result of ongoing trade actions and the uncertain geopolitical environment. Chinese stimulus measures are being put in place to cushion the slowdown in that economy. Chinese environmental policies are expected to continue to impact high-grade iron-ore and manganese ore markets positively thereby supporting the demand for the group’s high quality products. The demand for lump iron-ore and pellets is expected to remain firm, which should be supportive for premiums on these products. However, the recent decline in steel prices and reduced steel mill profitability in China is anticipated to result in a substitution in favour of ore with lower iron content. This is likely to result in a narrowing of price differentials between the various grades of the group’s products. The growing oversupply in the ferrochrome market and the subsequent pressure on chrome ore prices is set to constrain any major upward chrome ore price movements. The group remains confident that its portfolio of mines and marketing operations are well positioned for the future.