Aim-listed Cora Gold has provided initial results from its aircore (AC) and reverse circulation (RC) drill programme at the Sanankoro gold discovery in the Yanfolila Gold Belt, in Mali, where the focus has been on outlining higher grades. Highlights from the results include 8 m at 3.17 g/t gold from 69 m; 26 m at 2.60 g/t gold from 71 m; and 24 m at 2.83 g/t gold from 56 m. This latest drill programme comprised four RC holes (381 m) and one core hole (76 m) and provided confirmation and infill of historical drilling at the Zone A prospect on the Sanankoro structure. These were the first set of results received from the targeted drill programme involving 3 000 m of AC and RC drilling and 200 m of core drilling at Sanankoro. The core hole was drilled to provide a composite oxide metallurgical sample for a preliminary metallurgical testwork programme at the Wardell Armstrong International facility to assess the amenability for cyanide leach extraction of gold from oxide mineralisation. The drill results demonstrated good continuity of geological units, comprising a hanging wall of finer grained sandstone and siltstone overlying coarse grained sandstone and volcanoclastic grits. Gold mineralisation and quartz veining is typically controlled by the coarser grained rocks. All holes ended in oxidised material, to vertical depths of about 90 m. “These initial results from our latest drill programme are particularly encouraging. The results reported from the Zone A prospect vindicate our strategy of focusing on oxide deposit areas that have the potential to become higher-grade starter pits for a future development opportunity. “The continuity of the widths, grades and near-surface location of the gold mineralisation is potentially indicative of a zone that is in the ‘sweet spot’ with potential for future economic extraction – in particular given the deep weathering that has resulted in oxidation to depths of 90 m or more,” said CEO Dr Jonathan Forster. The company expected to release results from drilling at the nearby Selin prospect within the next few weeks.