JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Harmony Gold is currently adjudicating a tender for the drilling of the Target North greenfield exploration project in the Free State and is engaged in near mine brownfield exploration at Kalgold in the North West. Harmony Gold CEO Peter Steenkamp on Tuesday described the Target North prospect as being “quite exciting”, and Harmony COO business development, company strategy and projects Phillip Tobias said that a “vigorous and aggressive exploration drive” is under way at Kalgold, where the company already has an opencast gold mine. (Also watch attached Creamer Media video.) Following the company’s presentation of half-year results, Steenkamp said of Target North: “We believe there’s quite a high-grade VCR (Ventersburg Contact Reef) above the massives. If we’re proven correct, it will make it quite a viable project going forward,” he added. And Tobias said of the exploration programme at Kalgold: “We’re currently drilling, we’ll assess the results, undertake the studies and, at the right time, we’ll come back to the market.” At prefeasibility stage is the Mispah Tailings Reclamation project, a tailings retreatment project acquired from AngloGold Ashanti as part of the Moab Khotsong transaction and a feasibility stage is the Central Plant Reclamation project, also a surface tailings project. Underground projects being studied at the Zaaiplaats high-grade mine extension project, which is still at the prefeasibility stage, and the Great Noligwa high-grade shaft-pillar extraction project, which is at feasibility stage. Still at permitting stage is the large and very promising Wafi-Golpu copper/gold project in Papua New Guinea, which will deploy a mechanised block cave mining method. Should Golpu come on stream in 2023, it will have a very profitable 30-year life ahead of it, whereas Harmony’s South African production faces a substantial 400 000 oz production decline in the next five years. Although the company has long-life South African assets in the form of Joel and Tshepong in the Free State and Doornkop in Gauteng, and although Moab Khotsong also brings with it the potential brownfield Zaaiplaats mine-life-extension option, something more sustainable will be needed to keep the company away from the local ‘cliff’ it is facing. The most glaring local mine-building opportunity facing the company is Target North in the Free State, where Harmony ceased drilling exploration holes in 2007. Since then, the company has succeeded in getting the prospecting right incorporated into the Target mining right and will recommence exploration drilling from surface in the area this year to establish the mining potential of the Target North resource. As the then Anglovaal Mining discovered several years ago, the mine design in the Target area is required to differ markedly from traditional South African narrow-reef gold mines. Anglovaal found thick zones in the Bothaville Gap area that could be mined using mechanised methods. If Target North did eventuate as a mine, it would typically require a top cut to destress the locality’s twin massives of what would be a deep-level mine. Other opportunities to avoid the looming ‘cliff’ would include Harmony just continuing to press on with what it has not been given much credit for doing – extending the lives of the mines that it acquires by developing declines, with a typical example of life-extension being at Tshepong-Phakisa, where ongoing decline development has opened up additional ore reserves. Harmony has extracted gold from more than 50 shaft pillars and its experience in shaft pillar extraction is likely to help it to mine Moab Khotsong’s high-grade Great Noligwa pillar. Combined with three isolated reserve blocks, a ten-year-plus life-of-mine will unfold at the newly acquired operation. The company is currently mining the high-grade Bambanani shaft pillar in the Welkom area very successfully, which could add to the experience needed to extract at the larger Great Noligwa pillar. Moab Khotsong also takes in all of AngloGold Ashanti’s involvement in uranium mining. Among the adjustments already made has been a cessation of leader reef mining at the fast depleting Unicel mine, where only the Basal reef is being extracted.