JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Following 58 mineworkers dying in South Africa in 2018, Kumba Iron Ore CE Themba Mkhwanazi on Tuesday drew attention to 2019 beginning globally with the tragic loss of life at Brumadinho, in Brazil, as a result of an iron-ore tailings dam collapse that killed 134 people, left many missing and caused major environmental damage. Mkhwanazi said at Kumba’s presentation of 2018 that the tragedy brought home the reality of the risks of mining and why the safety of its people should always come first and environmental protection should receive high priority. (Also watch attached Creamer Media video). Almost all of the victims of the Vale iron-ore operation’s tailings dam disintegration were workers at the mine. The Brazilian company is taking an expected 40-million tonnes of product out of the market as it reconfigures its tailings dam safety, which is expected to result in iron-ore prices of $71/t to $75/t going forward. Mkhwanazi emphasised the importance of each mineworker being able to return home safely to loved ones “each and every day”. Kumba, which has been fatality-free for three consecutive years, has linked safety to business performance through its incentive structures and rewards a positive safety culture. Health and well-being of employees is equally important to the Anglo American Group company, where a comprehensive health and wellness programme has been introduced to manage and prevent diseases. The company is also continuing to achieve good results from its environment sustainability programme, with no major environmental incidents reported for the third consecutive year. Kumba rehabilitated 130 ha with an additional 2 500 ha assigned for biodiversity offsets. “Our people are at the heart of our business and investing in them not only rewards them for their hard work, but it also strengthens our business” Mkhwanazi commented to Mining Weekly Online. Quality-improving  Kumba generated hefty operational cash flow, paid a sizeable cash dividend, pressed on with brownfield exploration in a new area and supported the creation of 2 600 new jobs in the local community in a year of higher prices for its products. It exported 43.3-million tonnes at an average price of $72/t, outperforming its peers. Kumba generated close to R19-billion worth of operational cash flow, buoyed by a flexible approach to production that lifted average product quality to an iron (fe) content of 64.5%, ­up from the previous 64.1% fe. “We supported our employees and their families with R4.6-billion in salaries and benefits,” he added. The South African fiscus received R4.1-billion in income tax and R1-billion in royalties. In making way for mining at Dingleton, it has relocated 507 households to Siyathemba, built a school for 600 learners, multi-purpose centre and police station. A new clinic and a youth centre are expected to be completed by year end.