Aim-listed W Resources on Tuesday announced that it had completed further shipments of tungsten concentrate from its La Parrilla mine, in Spain, where development remained on track as construction of the jig plant advanced towards completion. Following the first shipment, announced in December, W had completed three other shipments to its European customer. Accumulative production now exceeded 50 t of tungsten concentrate and production rates were expected to increase in February, as production switched to higher grade mined ore from the historic tailings feed. Meanwhile, W reported that development completion was progressing on multiple fronts with the crusher fully commissioned in December, while the liquefied natural gas power station was completed and commissioned in January. The new operations offices and non-plant infrastructure were also complete. Following some initial delays, the jig plant is being accelerated and W stated that it would be “mechanically complete” in early March. The bulk of the equipment for the concentrator, including the shaking tables, as currently on site and shipments of modular spirals from Australia arrived in early February. German manufacturer allmineral Aufbereitungstechnik is contractually responsible for the on-budget and on-schedule completion of the jig plant and the concentrator and the continued delivery of structural steel deliveries for the concentrator is key for plant completion. While the company was pleased to have achieved its 50 t production milestone, and to have delivered its first four tungsten shipments, W chairperson Michael Masterman said that optimising plant performance and ensuring quality production specifications continued to be a focus. “[These] remain the core building blocks in the planning as we move to larger scale production in the second quarter of 2019,” he said. Mine optimisation and planning is also advanced with more than of 7 100 m of grade control drilling complete and the fast track mine area ready for initial mining operations in February. W Resources is a tungsten, copper and gold mining company with assets in Spain and Portugal.