Global gold miner Newmont has appointed Rio Tinto head of productivity Rob Atkinson as executive VP and COO with effect from June 1, the company announced on Monday. Atkinson will succeed Tom Palmer, who is taking over as CEO from Gary Goldberg, who will retire in the fourth quarter. In a press statement, the company said that Palmer, who is currently president and COO, would assume increasing responsibility for leading the integration of Newmont and Goldcorp as he transitioned his duties as COO to Atkinson. “Over a 25-year mining career delivering step-change improvements in safety, productivity and sustainability, Rob will further enhance the depth and quality of Newmont’s team,” said Palmer. Atkinson has held a variety of roles leading operations and business improvement efforts in Australia, the UK and the US. Most recently, Atkinson served as head of productivity and technical support for Rio Tinto and was responsible for the company’s $5-billion productivity improvement strategy. Atkinson also served as COO for Rio Tinto’s portfolio of copper interests in Mongolia, the US, Chile and Indonesia. Previously, he led ASX-listed Energy Resources of Australia as CEO and director, and served as general manager of Weipa Bauxite. Last month, Newmont and Goldcorp announced the two companies would combine their portfolios of operations, projects, reserves, exploration opportunities, and talent to create a leading gold business. The company states that, on day one after the transaction closes, which is expected in the second quarter, Newmont Goldcorp will target six-million to seven-million ounces of steady-state gold production over a decades-long time horizon, have the largest gold reserves and resources in the gold sector, including on a per share basis, offer the highest dividend yield among senior gold producers, be located in favourable mining jurisdictions and prolific gold districts on four continents and offer financial flexibility and an investment-grade balance sheet to advance the most promising projects.