Petroleum company Total has made a significant gas condensate discovery on the Brulpadda prospects, located on Block 11B/12B in the Outeniqua basin, the company announced on Thursday. Located 175 km off the southern coast of South Africa, the Brulpadda well encountered 57 m of net gas condensate pay in lower cretaceous reservoirs. Following the success of the main objective, the well was deepened to a final depth of 3 633 m and has also been successful in the Brulpadda-deep prospect. “We are very pleased to announce the Brulpadda discovery, which was drilled in a challenging deep-water environment,” said Total exploration senior VP Kevin McLachlan. He added that Total “has opened a new world-class gas and oil play and is well positioned to test several follow-on prospects on the same block”. Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe welcomed the announcement, stating, “it is exciting for our county that this discovery has been made. It is potentially a major boost for the economy, and we welcome it as we continue to seek new investment.” He stated that the discovery confirmed his decision to separate legislation for oil and gas from “traditional minerals”, as it would enable policies that fully support the oil and gas sector’s potential. “We are moving with speed to finalise this legislation to ensure that it is presented as soon as the sixth Parliament sits,” he commented. Total noted that it had drilled this exploration well with the latest generation drilling ship and was able to leverage its experience in similar environments, such as the West of Shetland, off the UK. Following the success of Brulpadda and confirmation of the play’s potential, Total and its partners plan to acquire three-dimensional seismic surveys this year, followed by the drilling of up to four exploration wells on this licence. The Block 11B/12B covers an area of 19 000 km2, with water depths ranging from 200 m to 1.8 km, and is operated by Total with a 45% working interest, alongside Qatar Petroleum (25%), Cape Town-based CNR International (20%) and South African consortium Main Street (10%).