PERTH (miningweekly.com) – A new report by advisory firm Ernst & Young (EY) has revealed that technological advances will have a significant impact on the Australian resources sector, with some 77% of jobs in the Australian mining sector likely to be enhanced or re-designed due to technology, within the next five years. In a report commissioned by the Minerals Council of Australia (MCA), EY noted that productivity is expected to increase by some 23%, with the roll-out of new technologies, which could cost up to A$35-billion, and an investment of between A$5-billion and A$13-billion in the next ten years in workforce capabilities, needed to unlock future productivity gains. “Innovation, people and skills combined with technological advances will deliver a more globally competitive minerals sector that delivers fulfilling careers in highly paid, high-skilled jobs,” said MCA CEO Tania Constable. “New technology and innovative practices will enhance the performance and productivity of 42% of Australian mining jobs, with a further 35% of occupations being redesigned and up-skilled leading to more valuable employment opportunities. Automation will give the opportunity for reskilling into other areas,” she added. The report suggested that the main impact of technology on the industry would be to enhance or redesign occupations, with only a small proportion of occupations likely to decrease in demand as a consequence of technology and automation. Furthermore, analysed through the value chain, findings reveal the end-to-end mining stage has the highest proportion of occupations enhanced by the impacts of technology, and the mining operations stage to contain the greatest proportion of redesigned occupations, the report read. EY’s study also identified that Australia’s education and training system needed to be modernised by offering improved course structures and enhanced movement between universities and the vocational education sectors. “Future university degrees will need to have a mix of the latest scientific, technical and trade skills along with soft skills including collaboration, team building, communication and creativity. “A decade-long investment by industry and government in general skills incorporating mathematics, data analytics, computing and change management will boost productivity in the minerals sector,” Constable said. She noted that jobs that would be made future-ready through large investments would include metal fitters, machinists, building and engineering technical trades and experts in electronics and mechatronics.