PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian federal government on Thursday released a National Resources Statement, outlining plans to attract investment, develop new resources and markets and share the benefits of success with more regional communities. This is the first such statement for more than 20 years. “This new national policy framework is vital for planning and stability in the resources industry. It will help us to leverage our strengths and remain at the forefront of world’s best practice. It will give investors, workers and the community the confidence to make informed decisions,” Resources Minister Matt Canavan said. “There is a bright future for the resources sector given the economic growth occurring in our region. By 2030, Asia will produce more than half the world’s economic output, consume 40% of its energy and be home to a middle class of almost 3.5-billion people. “Given this growth, and if Australia can maintain its global share of commodity production, at least 24 000 new direct mining jobs could be created, along with the broader prosperity those jobs will bring.” To achieve this outcome, the government will focus on five key priorities; attracting investment; developing new resources, industries and markets; investing in new technologies, especially to improve environmental outcomes; creating well paid secure jobs; and ensuring local communities receive benefits from mining activities, Canavan said. “Our work starts now. Some elements will be progressed in collaboration with the states and territories through the Council of Australian Governments Energy Council, given their responsibilities in regulating the resources sector. “This includes an agreement to establish a new critical minerals work programme to boost exploration, develop a data strategy to de-risk investment decisions, and build community confidence in the sector.” The government will also progress a number of initiatives including promoting a national resources brand to market the advantages of Australia as a resources investment destination to the world, and supporting the development of new resource basins through cooperation with state and territory jurisdictions. The government would also continue to invest in the most advanced seismic and aero-magnetic surveys to help discover the next major mineral find through the A$100-million Exploring for the Future programme, while improving the consistency and scope of data across the resource sector. “Our resources sector makes up 8% of our economy and exports are predicted to reach a record A$250-billion in 2018/19. It also employs around 1.1-million people directly and indirectly and is the largest employer of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. “These initiatives will help our resources industry deliver even more benefits to Australians. Clearly, we are in great shape but we cannot take our success for granted. “Taking action now means a stronger and more robust resources sector into the future. This National Resources Statement will help keep us at the top of our game and pave the way for decades of prosperity for all Australians,” Canavan said. The Queensland Resources Council (QRC) has welcomed the National Resource Statement, with CEO Ian Macfarlane saying it was an important signal about the ongoing value of the resources sector for all Australians. “The Australian government’s Resources Statement maps a long-term future for resources through new investment, developing new resources, making best use of technology, creating jobs and strengthening mining communities. “This is good news for all Queenslanders, given the spread of mining communities across our state. “It’s particularly good news that the Resources Statement sees a future where at least another 24 000 direct jobs are created in Australian resources. The resources sector is rich in potential, but we must have a plan to capitalise on our opportunities,” Macfarlane said.