Global diversified miner Anglo American has appointed nonexecutive director Nolitha Fakude as chairperson of Anglo American South Africa’s board, effective September 1. She succeeds Norman Mbazima, who announced his retirement in April. Anglo subsidiary Kumba Iron Ore CEO Themba Mkhwanazi will also join the Group Management Committee of Anglo, effective August 1. “We welcome Fakude to our global executive team in a key strategic role that draws together our extensive business interests as the largest mining company in South Africa. “Her breadth of experience at Sasol and her board experience with us and other major organisations stand her in good stead as we build upon our sustainable partnerships with all our stakeholders in South Africa,” Anglo CEO Mark Cutifani commented on Wednesday. Fakude said she was proud to join Anglo in an executive capacity. “As South Africa’s most significant mining investor, to the tune of R72-billion over the next five years, we have a duty to keep improving the competitive position and performance of our businesses and for our stakeholder relationships to be mutually reinforcing. “I am looking forward to working with government and regulators to help set up South Africa’s mining industry for long term success,” she said. Anglo added Hixonia Nyasulu and Nonkululeko Nyembezi as nonexecutive directors to the South African board, effective November this year and January 2020, respectively. Nyasulu is also an independent director of London-listed Vivo Energy. She previously served on the boards of petrochemicals giant Sasol, Nedbank, the Development Bank of Southern Africa, Anglo American Platinum and fast-moving consumer goods giant Unilever. Nyembezi is also chairperson of the JSE and Alexander Forbes Group, while serving as CEO of international thermal coal miner Ichor Coal. She previously served on the boards of Old Mutual, coal miner Exxaro Resources, Universal Coal and State-owned Denel. She was also previously CEO of steel producer ArcelorMittal South Africa.