Durban-based condition monitoring specialist WearCheck has bought Anglo Field Services (AFS), adding three new established divisions to the company’s reliability solutions portfolio, including nondestructive testing (NDT), technical compliance (TC) and rope condition assessment (RCA). The fourth AFS division, asset maintenance management (AMM), has been absorbed into WearCheck’s existing reliability solutions team, boosting the company’s manpower in this section, as well as adding technical expertise and additional instrumentation. Branching into NDT means that WearCheck will now be able to conduct a range of analysis techniques through which the properties and condition of a component or system are evaluated without causing any damage to it. WearCheck’s new NDT division offers a range of techniques, including eddy current, magnetic particle, liquid penetrant, radiographic, ultrasonic and visual testing. The new rope testing division provides specialist cable strength assessment and is manned by seven of only 12 people in South Africa who are qualified to conduct these tests, the company says. The technical compliance division provides expert guidance to assist companies to comply with regulatory requirements and how to rectify violations or problems highlighted during audits. Prior to merging with WearCheck, AFS operated as part of Anglo’s technical division under the Anglo Research section, which provided specialist NDT and materials consultancy services to Anglo Group companies and other clients on a global basis. WearCheck is now positioned to offer customers access to an augmented portfolio of reliability solutions in a comprehensive one-stop-shop, leading to cost savings and increased convenience for customers. MD Neil Robinson believes the addition of new services enhances the availability of assets operated by WearCheck customers by expanding the choice of condition monitoring options. He explained that the incorporation of AFS into WearCheck has been a seamless process so far, mainly owing to the two companies operating with a parallel devotion to data integrity and a shared dedication to customer service excellence.