Diversified miner Anglo American’s copper-equivalent production for the second quarter ended June 30, increased by 2% year-on-year, on the back of the successful ramp-up at the Minas-Rio iron-ore mine, in Brazil, and a strong performance at its metallurgical coal operations following the longwall moves and plant upgrade work in the first quarter. Anglo American CEO Mark Cutifani on Thursday said Kumba Iron Ore’s production had improved following production challenges in the first quarter. “De Beers, in view of prevailing market conditions, will continue to produce to demand for the year. We remain broadly on track overall to deliver this full-year’s production targets, with an increase to Minas-Rio guidance offsetting two reductions at De Beers and Kumba Iron Ore,” he said. De Beers’ diamond production decreased by 14% to 7.7-million carats in the quarter. Copper production increased by 1% to 159 100 t owing to strong performance at Los Bronces and Collahuasi, in Chile. Platinum production increased by 3% to 520 300 oz, but palladium production decreased by 1% to 347 200 oz, owing to a change in the mix of production. Minas-Rio’s iron-ore production was 5.9-million tonnes as its strong ramp-up continued ahead of schedule. Metallurgical coal production increased by 11% to 5.8-million tonnes owing to a generally stronger performance and the completion of longwall moves in the first quarter. Thermal coal production decreased by 8% to 6.6-million tonnes, primarily owing to local drought conditions at Cerrejón, in Colombia. Anglo’s full-year copper production guidance remains unchanged at 630 000 t to 660 000 t. Full-year production at Minas-Rio is now expected to be between 19-million and 21-million tonnes, compared with the previously guided 18-million to 20-million tonnes, on the back of the operation’s strong performance in the first half of this year. Production guidance for Anglo’s metallurgical coal and thermal coal have remained at 22-million to 24-million tonnes and 26-million to 28-million tonnes, respectively.