JSE-listed explosives and speciality chemicals group AECI on Wednesday reported headline earnings per share (HEPS) and earning per share (EPS) of 365c and 367c, respectively, for the six months ended June 30. Both HEPS and EPS were 20% lower than the 458c reported in the first half of 2018. Despite this decrease in earnings, AECI, which is led by CEO Mark Dytor, declared an interim cash dividend of 156c an ordinary share for the half-year period, representing a 5% increase from the 149c a share paid out to shareholders in 2018. A South African dividend withholding tax of 20% will be applicable to the dividend, resulting in a net dividend of 124.8c a share payable to shareholders who are not eligible for exemption or reduction. The net asset value per share attributable to ordinary shareholders increased by 3.2% from 8 714c at June 30, 2018, to 8 994c for the period under review. AECI further delivered what the company cited as a “creditable performance” in achieving revenue growth of 14% year-on-year to just over R11.9-billion for the period. This, AECI said on Wednesday, was underpinned by contributions for the full period from the acquisitions finalised in 2018. These acquisitions include Schirm and Much Asphalt. AECI further achieved revenue improvements in all of its strategic pillars, with the Mining Solutions segment benefitting from higher sales volumes in the rest of Africa, as well as the weaker rand:dollar exchange rate. Foreign and export revenue of almost R5-billion accounted for about 42% of total revenue, the company said. Profit from operations was R826-million, 9% lower than the R911-million posted for the prior comparable period. In this respect, the company on Wednesday said that, among others, the costs associated with strategic realignment projects initiated in the fourth quarter of 2018 by AEL Intelligent Blasting in the Mining Solutions segment and by ImproChem, had negatively impacted on profitability in the six months under review. By the end of the period, AECI had to pay an aggregate nonrecurring cost of R156-million, with the total cost of these projects amounting to R204-million. Further, changes in significant accounting policies also influenced the chemicals and explosives company, while noncash amortisation of identifiable assets in the amount of R23-million, in aggregate, was recognised through the power purchase agreement for both Schirm and Much Asphalt in the first half of this year. Power supply constraints in South Africa in the first quarter also impacted on the company, curtailing some of AECI's own operations. However, power supply challenges had also resulted in adverse consequences for customers in some sectors serviced by AECI.