PERTH (miningweekly.com) – A new report by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation’s (CSIRO’s) Gas Industry Social and Environmental Research Alliance (GISERA) has confirmed the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions benefits from increased use of natural gas in domestic and export markets. The report assessed GHG emissions from a coal seam gas (CSG) to liquefied natural gas (LNG) project in Queensland, and the relative climate benefits of using Queensland natural gas in place of thermal coal as fuel for generation of electricity in Australia. The report found that GHG emissions associated with CSG production, compression, dehydration, water treatment and liquefaction represented 1.4% of likely future production for this CSG-LNG project. The report suggested that fuel switching from black thermal coal to Queensland CSG for electricity generation using high efficiency closed cycle gas turbines in Australia, thus avoiding liquefaction, shipping and regasification, represents a potential reduction in GHG emissions of around 50%. GISERA director Dr Damian Barrett said the results of this latest research aligned with other studies completed by the CSIRO and GISERA in Queensland and other parts of Australia to understand methane and other GHG emissions associated with unconventional onshore gas activities. “These results are consistent with other CSIRO studies in this region which suggest that the fugitive emissions component of the total greenhouse gas emissions identified in this latest study are at the lower end of the scale,” Barrett said. “The climate benefits of using natural gas in place of thermal coal for electricity generation are generally accepted when fugitive emissions are less than 3% of total production. “Results of this latest research underline the potential climate benefits of using gas in place of coal to generate electricity, particularly when using high efficiency closed cycle gas turbines.” The Australian Petroleum Production & Exploration Association (Appea) CEO Andrew McConville said the CSIRO’s findings confirmed the overwhelming evidence about the key role gas plays domestically and in export markets in lowering global GHG emissions. “Australia’s LNG industry is in a unique position to contribute substantially to the economic development of the nation and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions at home and abroad,” McConville said. “Australia already generates significant national economic, environmental and social benefits through the use of its substantial gas resources. “Using more natural gas in Australia’s power generation and resource processing would significantly enhance the nation’s ability to meet increasing energy needs and reduce emissions. “In considering Australia’s climate change policy responses in the period to 2030, and our contribution to global emissions reduction efforts, it’s important to acknowledge the positive contribution Australia’s LNG exports make now, and will increasingly make, to the global effort.”