JSE-listed Anglo American Platinum (Amplats) and TSX-listed Platinum Group Metals (PTM) have launched a joint venture, Lion Battery Technologies, to accelerate the development of next-generation battery technology using platinum and palladium. Lion has subsequently entered into an agreement with Florida International University to further advance a research programme that uses platinum and palladium to unlock the potential of lithium air and lithium sulphur battery chemistries, to increase their discharge capacities and cyclability. Amplats in a statement on Monday said Lion was reviewing several additional and complementary opportunities focused on developing this battery technology. “Owing to considerably higher energy density, lithium oxygen and lithium sulphur batteries can perform better, by orders of magnitude, than best-in-class lithium-ion batteries that are currently on the market. “This new generation of lightweight, power batteries has the potential to grow to scale on the back of the attractiveness of battery electric vehicles and other applications,” said Amplats market development head Benny Oeyen. He added that this early-stage technology was aligned with the company’s broader strategy to bring new technologies to market that would help it secure future demand for platinum group metals (PGMs). PTM CEO R Michael Jones said developing new applications for PGMs was key to ensuring long-term sustainable demand, demand which would be important to the future success of the company’s Waterberg palladium and platinum mining project, in South Africa’s Limpopo province. The Minerals Council South Africa in February released its ‘National Platinum Strategy for South Africa’ document, which set out various proposed initiatives to help the South African platinum industry grow and increase employment. Key to the growth of the industry is the need to grow demand for platinum by developing new applications that make use of the precious metal. The development of fuel cells and hydrogen technology are also top of mind for the South African and global platinum mining industry.