PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian resources sector has welcomed the reappointment of Matt Canavan as Minister for Resources and the re-elected government’s focus on creating jobs, responsible economic management and Budget surpluses. A Coalition government, led by the Liberal party, was voted into power earlier this month, with Scott Morrison at the helm. “A key focus for all of my Ministers and their departments will be lifting performance on government service delivery. This will include congestion busting on regulatory and bureaucratic roadblocks, making better use of technology and better integrating service delivery across portfolios. The goal is to make it easier to deal with and access the government services Australians rely on,” Morrison said over the weekend. The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) said that the reappointment of many Ministers was a welcome sign of stability and showed that the government was getting on with the job of growing Australia, strengthening regional communities and supporting its world-leading minerals industry. “In particular, we congratulate Senator Canavan on his reappointment as Minister for Resources and Northern Australia. MCA has worked closely with Minister Canavan in developing the Coalition’s Resources Statement, which will strengthen Australia’s future through enhanced skills and investment, promotion of our national resources brand and boosting exploration,” said MCA CEO Tania Constable. “Minister Canavan has already made a significant contribution to the resources sector and understands that Australian mining needs competitive investment settings, faster approvals, flexible workplaces and less duplication in environmental law to deliver more jobs for our regions.” Constable also welcomed the reappointment of Minister Angus Taylor in his ongoing role as Minister for Energy and the new portfolio of Emissions Reduction, as well as Ken Wyatt's appointment as the first Indigenous Australian to represent the First Australians in the Cabinet. “In delivering on its policies for resources, skills, environment and a stronger economy, the new government's success should be measured by whether its initiatives create jobs, strengthen regional communities and promote growth. “MCA will also continue to press for long-overdue reforms in policy areas such as workplace relations, environmental reform and reducing red tape so Australia stays in front of its global competitors,” Constable said. The Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) has also welcomed the Ministerial appointment, saying the industry body was looking forward to collaboratively working with the Ministers to continue the development of Australia’s oil and gas resources. “Last weekend’s election result highlighted that the nation wants a solid and growing economy, and a clear focus on stable energy and climate policy. We need policies that enable Australians to enjoy the benefits of our abundant natural resources and manage the transition to a lower carbon economy,” said Appea CEO Andrew McConville. “Our resources play a critical role in underpinning our economic wellbeing. Hundreds of thousands of Australian jobs rely on a reliable, affordable gas supply.” He noted that Minister Taylor’s commercial experience and understanding would be critical in finding solutions to ensuring affordable energy, maintaining reliable supply, reducing emissions and attracting new investment to the energy sector.