PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian resources sector has welcomed the results from the May 18 federal election, which was won by a Liberal-led Coalition with Scott Morrison at the helm. “The Coalition government’s strategic economic reform agenda to keep taxes low, in conjunction with responsible 2019/20 Budget measures, provides opportunities for large and small business to be successful. It also means that the mining industry will continue to develop the nation’s minerals for the benefit of everyone,” said the Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) CEO Tania Constable. “This is a win for regional jobs, particularly in the big resources states of Queensland, New South Wales and Western Australia. There is now a clear mandate for resources projects that have lawful approvals to proceed, such as the Adani coal mine in central Queensland and the Yeelirrie uranium mine in Western Australia.” Constable noted that the Coalition’s resources statement would promote Australia’s national brand, and boost cooperation with the states on the development of new resource basins, upgrading and enhancing skills and investment in advanced seismic and aero-magnetic surveys to discover the critical minerals needed for Australia’s future. The Coalition government has also made a number of commitments with the potential to deliver further growth and expansion of Australia’s resources sector including A$30-million for the Central Queensland University School of Mines and Manufacturing, the development of the critical minerals strategy to promote investment and provide priority status for funding applications for projects under the A$20-million Round 7 of the Cooperative Research Centres project, and A$3.4-million over four years to encourage more women into science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and careers, including an extension of the Science in Australia Gender Equity programme. The Coalition government also renewed commitment of A$100-million to produce new pre-competitive geoscience data through Geoscience Australia’s Exploring for the Future programme, the Junior Minerals Exploration Initiative to assist with greenfield exploration and A$100-million to support the development of hydrogen technologies. The Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) has also congratulated Morrison on his re-election, with CEO Andrew McConville saying the election success suggested the Australian community wanted a stable and balanced approach to the political and policy challenges facing the nation. “Appea urges a clear focus on stable energy and climate policy that enables Australians to enjoy the benefits of our abundant natural resources and manage the transition to a lower carbon economy,” McConville said. “In doing so, we must not forget the critical role natural resources play in underpinning our economic wellbeing and that hundreds of thousands of Australian jobs rely on a reliable, affordable gas supply.”