JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Low morale and high management turnover have impacted the operational performance of Lonmin heavily in the six months to March 31, the platinum mining company said on Friday. The London- and Johannesburg-listed company, headed by CEO Ben Magara, attributed the negative impact to extended timeline to close the Sibanye-Stillwater transaction, as well as safety stoppages and power outages by State electricity utility Eskom. The extended timeline is a consequence of the appeal against the Sibanye-Stillwater transaction brought to the Competition Appeal Court (CAC) by the Association of Mineworkers and Construction Union (AMCU). The CAC judgement in the matter involving AMCU/Sibanye is due to be handed down in the Cape High Court at 10h00 on Friday, May 17. Sibanye-Stillwater is poised to acquire the entire issued and to-be-issued ordinary share capital of Lonmin, on the basis of one new Sibanye-Stillwater share for each Lonmin share. In reporting a 4%-reduced workforce to 29 812, Lonmin reiterated its conviction that the consolidation of the company through the all-share Sibanye-Stillwater offer remained the best way forward to avoid more job losses, in the face of its lack of working capital and continuing exposure to volatile currency and metal markets. Although, in the short term, the company’s return to profitability and $200-million forward metal sale facility has improved its liquidity, these do not provide a long-term capital structure solution that enables the company to invest in new projects necessary to avoid shaft closures and job losses. Lonmin’s strategy of minimising capital expenditure is making it increasingly difficult to maintain its production profile and keep shafts open. Driven by higher platinum group metals (PGMs) prices and a weaker rand-dollar exchange rate, operating profit for the first six months of the company’s financial year to March 31, was $70-million, compared with an operating loss of $32-million in the corresponding period of last year. Earnings before interest, tax and depreciation (Ebitda) were $78-million, compared with a loss of $26-million, and net cash was $71-million, compared with $17-million last year. The 25.9%-higher rand basket price of R16 268/oz was hit by a 15.5%-higher unit cost of R14 994/ PGM ounce, on the back of the reduced mining putput, lower grades and a poorer recovery rate. Mining production was 7.7% down at 4.3-million tonnes and total metals-in-concentrate platinum production was 10.3% down at 276 020 oz. Capital expenditure (capex) was held at R377-million ($27-million), compared with R411-million ($33-million) in the prior year period, as the company continues to use capex as a cash management lever. Even stay-in-business capital, which is considered low risk, was deferred. Capex and working capital requirements were funded from Ebitda, as well as funding repayments, interest of $38-million and proceeds from sale of Wallbridge and Petrozim of $13-million, which explains the company’s gross cash position of $247-million at March 31 being $17-million lower than last year’s September 30 balance of $264-million. Gross cash was $167-million at March 31 last year. Capital was spent on a new stormwater dam and air emissions’ compliance at the concentrators, and also on the Rowland Merensky project and the fourth phase of the building of infill apartments but capex at the Rowland MK2 project was slowed and design and supplier delays held up capex at the smelter and refinery. The $200-million Pangaea forward metal sale agreement with PIM, an associate company of Jiangxi Copper, will be amortised by October 2021. The new facility has improved Lonmin’s short-term liquidity and removed restrictive conditions contained in the previous debt facilities but it does not offer the ability to avoid retrenchments and shaft closures. The net improvement in liquidity from the new facility, after fees of $8-million and a further $8-million to collateralise guarantees, was $34-million. The first-half production setback means that Lonmin expects to achieve platinum sales at the lower end of its 640 000 oz and 670 000 oz guidance range. Ordinarily, the stronger traditional second-half performance would assist in containing unit cost increases on a full-year basis but I the circumstances, unit cost guidance range has had to be lifted to R13 600/ PGM ounce and R14 400/ PGM ounce produced. Capital expenditure guidance for the year is maintained at between R1.4-billion and R1.5-billion, with uncertainty around the profit estimate. The increased all-share offer by Sibanye-Stillwater requires the approval of Lonmin shareholders at a court meeting on May 28 and the passing of a special resolution at the general meeting, followed by court approval.