JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Platinum group metals mining company Impala Platinum (Implats) on Monday entered into a definitive agreement to acquire 100% of the outstanding shares in North American Palladium Limited for close to R11.4-million. North American Palladium (NAP), a company headquartered in Toronto, Canada, primarily mines and explores for palladium. Listed on the TSX and the US OTC market, NAP wholly owns and operates the Lac des Iles Mine, northwest of Thunder Bay, Ontario, and also has an ownership in two Canadian exploration properties, the Sunday Lake Project and Shebandowan Joint Venture. In operation since 1993, Lac des Iles is a platinum group metals (PGM) producer, which in 2018 produced 237 461 oz of palladium at an all-in sustaining (AISC) of US$690/oz, generating C$147-million in earnings and C$45-million in free cash flow. The operation is on track to meet its 2019 production guidance of 220 000 to 235 000 oz of palladium at an AISC of $785 to $815 per palladium ounce produced. Implats CEO Nico Muller said the transaction would expedite Implats’ transition to becoming a multinational producer, allowing the company to capitalise on expected medium-term deficits in the palladium market. He added that the deal provided access to an established 700-employee, round-the-clock operational asset, which employs bulk-mining mechanised methods and occupies an attractive position on the industry cost curve. “History has shown us that it is important to develop in-country leadership. We don’t have a very attractive success record of exporting South Africans to head up operations. I say this particularly with regard to NAP, where we do have very strong leadership,” Muller said in response to Mining Weekly Online. “What is important is that we develop strong alignments and integration between the South African head office, operations and Canada. The company has been very impressed with the leadership and operational teams… and we’d like to keep it pretty much the same and retain key management. What we will do is manage the transition very carefully and look at governance practices being embedded into NAP, so we will send a small transition team to manage that process.” Payback period at current spot prices is expected to be less than three years.