JSE-listed Master Drilling has recorded positive results from pilot concept validation tests that are currently being undertaken on a new shaft boring system it is developing. The system is being developed in response to industry demand, with miners needing to reach orebodies quickly, efficiently and safely. Master Drilling is working on a system that is able to meet certain key performance indicators requested by companies. The company on Wednesday indicated that one issue highlighted by miners has been the ability to access orebodies deeper than 1 000 m. The ideal solution for this would be to build a shaft, but that is very costly, which influences the feasibility of a project for a client, and also results in issues around legislation, safety and the quality of ore returned. Master Drilling is seeking to provide a system that moves away from the challenges of quality, safety and time that are presented by the conventional method of shaft sinking. Its new system is expected to make projects more financially feasible, with results aimed at reaching orebodies at a faster rate, as well as more efficiently and safely, than with shaft sinking. The system is expected to considerably impact the mining industry and open up opportunities in greenfield projects and shaft enlargements. The company has been exploring the concept of this system for about three years now. Currently, two components of the boring system are being tested on a test site near Fochville, cutting through hard rock. Thus far, the company indicated that results garnered have been largely positive, with good throughput being achieved. This test work constitutes the first of five phases that will make up the system's development. The company stated that the raise-boring machine must be adaptable to different projects and conditions in order for it to be financially feasible. Therefore, it needs to have a robust design that can be used for a variety of projects. This, however, does make the concept of such a system more challenging. The testing of the system on hard rock is also in line with this, given that this is not available worldwide, and is also the highest risk scenario for the concept. Notably, about 95% of the detailed design for the project has been completed, meaning that should test work prove successful, the company can move onto the next phase. In developing the system, Master Drilling is making use of local shaft sinking expertise, and about 60% of the system's components will be locally procured, which the company highlighted as good for the country and industry.