PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Queensland has reported another month of record exports during August, with strong global demand for both coal and liquefied natural gas (LNG) increasing export numbers to 13.8%, to A$87.4-billion, in the 12 months to August. “Month after month these figures are a testament to the hard work and global vision of Queensland’s export businesses, backed by our trade offices and our international trade meetings,” Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said. “The state’s resource firms, rural producers and manufacturers make a vital contribution to growing our economy, creating jobs and supporting local communities. Queensland Resources CEO Ian Macfarlane said the strong result showed the ongoing importance of the resources sector to the state’s economy. “Coal exports grew by 11.5%, or an extra A$3.9-billion, while Queensland’s second most valuable export, gas, is also enjoying strong volumes, with EnergyQuest’s data showing Queensland sent 8.2 petajoules of gas to other states while exporting 27 cargos of LNG, worth A$1.42-billion, in August,” Macfarlane said. “It’s no wonder that the Port of Gladstone is setting export records this year. “Mining, along with agriculture, is a vital primary industry that creates jobs and investment. Behind every billion in export values, there are jobs in local towns, and support for regional communities. “The resources industry is a partner for our farmers who are doing it very tough during drought at the moment. The resources sector works hand-in-hand with the agricultural sector to support local economies and provide landholders with an additional income stream. “That’s backed up by figures from the GasFields Commission that show as of 2018, the cumulative compensation paid to landholders by the gas industry was more than A$505-million. “These numbers demonstrate the co-existence model in Queensland is working well with farmers able to diversify their income by allowing companies to responsibly develop gas on their land. The current drought Queensland is experiencing is distressing and while it’s not the answer, the income from LNG companies can assist."