Swiss-Swedish multinational technology group ABB has announced that it has commissioned six gearless mill drives (GMDs) at the openpit Mina de Cobre copper mine, in the Central American Republic of Panama, ahead of schedule. Installation of the GMDs started late last year. ABB describes them as the most powerful mill drive systems for semi-autogenous grinding (SAG), ball and autogenous mills, that are currently on the market. ABB supplied two 28 MW GMDs and four 16.5 MW GMDs. The two larger units are working in the mine’s 40 foot SAG mills while the four smaller units are used in its 26 football mills. ABB also supplied the associated control systems. The Swiss-Swedish group’s GMDs can operate in extreme environments, including high altitudes and different climates, and in remote locations. Their design is optimised to maximise the availability and reliability of grinding mills. “Gearless mill drives are the ‘workhorses’ for grinding operations which are at the heart of any mine,” highlighted ABB Mina de Cobre project manager Rene Chacon. “The six ABB GMDs at the world class Panama Cobre project are extremely robust given demanding ambient conditions.” “As the ore extraction pace indicates they are maximising throughput,” he added. “They allow operators to react to changes in ore characteristics due to variable speed and, by optimising the process, are more efficient in their use of grinding power.” The technology group has also equipped the mine with its ABB Ability 800xA extended automation system. This enables the mine operators to make prompt and more accurate decisions, thereby increasing efficiency. ABB Ability Remote Service Centres have also been installed. These deliver cutting-edge remote diagnostic services, remote online monitoring of key assets, maintenance reports, and grant access to ABB product and maintenance experts. Mina de Cobre, which simply means Copper Mine, is Panama’s first mine to extract that metal. It is 90%-owned by copper-focused, Toronto Stock Exchange-listed, First Quantum Minerals.