PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The South Australian government on Tuesday announced that it would release ground for gold exploration in the North Central Victorian Goldfields, with preference given to mining companies that could demonstrate a "commitment to engaging with traditional owners" and which would boost local employment, Resources Minister Jaclyn Symes said. The North Central Victorian Goldfields ground release will be open to a competitive international tender, with strong interest expected thanks to the success of Kirkland Lake Gold’s Fosterville mine, which is set to produce four times as much high-grade gold this year as it did in 2016, Symes said. For the first time, engagement with traditional owners will be part of the evaluation process and selection criteria for prospective companies, so indigenous communities can assess the miners’ ability to develop relationships with traditional owners and work with consideration of cultural heritage. “Gold helped build Victoria’s wealth and the industry remains integral to creating regional jobs,” Symes said. “The North Central ground release will be a huge boost for this sector – attracting companies who are determined to work closely with regional communities and the traditional owners of the land they will explore.” The Minerals Council of Australia has welcomed the ground release, with the executive director of the Victorian division, James Sorahan, pointing out that exploration investment in the state was worth A$102-million in 2018/19, up by 213% over the last five years. “Turning Victoria’s mineral endowment into new investment and jobs will create more opportunities in regional Victoria. “Victoria’s mining sector produces gold and Australia’s only antimony mine employing thousands of Victorians. There are a number of potential new projects in the pipeline across the state in mineral sands, rare earths, lithium, copper and zinc,” Sorahan said. The Geological Survey of Victoria estimates that only half the gold that may exist in Victoria has been found over the past 169 years, putting the state in prime position for a second gold rush.