A fifth generation Rig Control System (RCS) has been introduced. The RCS is a hardware and software interface between a drill rig and the operator. Features such as machine-to-machine communication, sharing real-time drill plan updates between drills, auto tower angle and integrated camera view advanced awareness are some of the additions introduced. Whether operating from a remote location or on-board the drill, Epiroc’s RCS 5 intuitive main menu promises a user-friendly experience that aims to increase productivity. The new design allows the operator to focus on a specific task, while switching between screens in an organised and dynamic environment. The drill plan generator function allows for creating and editing drill plans on-board the rig or from a remote location. In addition, the drilling data screen features real-time depth and penetration-rate feedback with histogram for in-hole monitoring. The drilling plan manager allows users to create and edit drill plans on-board the rig or from a remote location. Key parameters can be tracked using a digital driller’s log, with the aim of simplifying end-of-shift reports. The system’s setup and tram screens detect setup and propel, displaying the applicable functions on the screen. Additional features • Machine-to-machine communication – allows machines operating on the same pattern to share real-time updates on the progress each drill is making against the drill plan.
• Auto tower angle - allows for remote angle adjustment and pinning of the drill tower.
• Integrated camera view - the camera feed is integrated into the RCS 5 screen, to avoid  confusion that can be caused by multiple displays. The RCS was developed specifically for the company's Pit Viper blasthole drilling rigs, with the aim of allowing users to further advance automation, contribute to time and cost savings and improve safety at mining operations. This article was first published by Creamer Media's Product Portal, to advertise on the Product Portal please email advertising@creamermedia.co.za and to subscribe to receive the Product Portal's weekly email newsletter please email subscriptions@creamermedia.co.za.