PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The resources sector has welcomed the announcement of an independent review of the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation (EPBC) Act. Federal Minister for Environment Sussan Ley on Tuesday said that the once-in-a-decade review would tackle green tape and deliver greater certainty to business groups, farmers and environmental organisations. “The statutory review will ensure that the EPBC Act remains fit for purpose and fit for the future within the context of our changing environment. “This review is not about ideology. The one thing all sides of the environmental debate concede is that the complexities of the Act are leading to unnecessary delays in reaching decisions and to an increased focus on process rather than outcomes.” Ley said that delays in EPBC decisions are estimated to cost the economy around A$300-million a year and frustrate both business and environmental groups. “The Act has been a world benchmark in environmental protection but needs to be adapted to changes in the environment and economy,” she said. The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) on Tuesday said that the review provided an important opportunity to enhance business certainty while upholding high environmental standards. “Australia’s world-leading minerals industry is committed to the protection of our unique environment. Yet regulatory complexity and duplication – including overlapping state and federal laws – delay minerals projects and reduce global competitiveness without improving environmental protection,” MCA CEO Tania Constable said. “These issues have been widely recognised for years without significant changes to the EPBC Act. The sustainable development of Australia’s natural resources and environmental regulation should be based on sound science. “Sensible reforms are needed to enhance business confidence and unlock minerals investment, support regional jobs and businesses and strengthen regional communities while boosting environmental protection,” Constable said. The Association of Mining and Exploration Companies has also welcomed the review, with CEO Warren Pearce saying the review should also take into consideration previous mining-, exploration- and resource-related reports released by the Productivity Commission which contain a number of constructive recommendations, including environmental reforms.