JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – In the context of efforts to have more sustainable and efficient operations and to reduce emissions of greenhouse gasses, Anglo American is implementing electromobility for the transport of its workers to and from work in Chile. Once fully implemented, the potential of this project is to prevent the consumption of between 300 and 1 000 litres of oil per 100 km, equivalent to about 50 000 t of carbon dioxide, Anglo American spokesperson Jana Marais stated in a written response to Mining Weekly Online. On the prospect of platinum-using hydrogen fuel cell vehicles being used to transport the personnel, Marais responded: “The Chilean energy landscape currently does not have the infrastructure and support service maturity needed to enable a fuel cell transport network. At this stage, our focus in the country is to leverage battery electric vehicles to further progress toward our vision of operating a carbon-neutral mine.” But Mining Weekly Online can report that fuel cell and hydrogen advances are rampant elsewhere, borne out by Fuel Cell & Hydrogen Energy Association, which states in its latest report that: As reported by Mining Weekly Online in August, South Africa, with its excellent solar and wind energy potential, is well placed to produce and export clean renewable hydrogen. Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) senior research engineer Thomas Roos reported at the time that hydrogen is emerging globally as an environmentally friendly energy carrier and Japan is planning to import up to 800 000 t/y of hydrogen from 2030. Hydrogen South Africa Infrastructure, led by Dr Dmitri Bessabarov and comprising teams at North West University and the CSIR, has been producing hydrogen from solar energy since 2013 and a study is under way to determine the costs of transporting hydrogen by land and sea, including the shipping of it to Japan. By the end of this study, it will be possible to determine the year when hydrogen generated, with the help of South African sunshine and wind, can be delivered to a Japanese port at the target price set by Japan, which is said to be ¥30/m3, set by Japan. This translates into about $3/kg, which can be achieved in South Africa by 2030, says Roos. Japan also wants the hydrogen it imports to be carbon free by 2040. South Africa can meet this requirement ten years early, he adds. If South Africa could capture a 25% share of the estimated 800 000 t/y hydrogen demand from Japan, this would be a $600-million market. This would help offset the projected decline in export earnings as a result of India’s intent, stated publicly in South Africa, to become self-sufficient in coal. India accounts for more than 50% of South Africa’s coal exports. Minerals Council South Africa CEO Roger Baxter has suggested that Johannesburg’s Rea Vaya bus rapid transit system could be considered for conversion to hydrogen. The Minerals Council’s own stationary fuel cell, which enables the building to be less reliant on the electricity grid and also uses repurposed by-products such as heat to contribute to the building’s ambient temperature in winter, has been registered under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Programme of Activities 9437: Cogeneration at Commercial sites. Twenty of 125 buses operated by the Gautrain Management Agency (GMA) and currently fuelled by diesel may be switched to green hydrogen. Mining Weekly has reported that Enertrag South Africa is one of the partners that have submitted a joint proposal to the International Climate Initiative for grant funding of buses driven by green hydrogen. It is envisaged that the green hydrogen fuel proposed for the 20 GMA buses would be produced from a combination of energy from wind and solar photovoltaic technologies.